*.u 



Confessions of an 
Economic Hit Man 



John Perkins 



BK 

Hfrrett-Koehlfp Publishers, Inc. 
San Francisco 

a BK Currents book 



/YUf':.. 



l^fyi&^ 






i rV 



''Xj 






"* , 






'^^^e'.:' "~%~ "V"™ J r^ ! fe 



' i~1 






Wity^T^ 



Copyright (o 2004 by John Perkins 

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, distributed, or 
transmitted in any form or by any means, including photocopying, recording, or other 
electronic or mechanical methods, without the prior written permission of the pub- 
lisher, except in the case of brief quotations embodied in critical reviews and certain 
other noncommercial uses permitted by copyright law. For permission requests, write to 
the publisher, addressed "Attention: Permissions Coordinator," at the address below. 
Berrett-Koehler Publishers, Inc., 

235 Montgomery- Street, Suite 650, San Francisco, CA 94104-2916 
Tel: (415) 288-0260 Fax: (415) 362-2512 www.bkconnection.coin 
ORDERING INFORMATION 

quantity sales. Special discounts are available on quantity purchases by corpora- 
tions, associations, and others. For details, contact the 'Special Sales Department" at 
the Berrett-Koehler address above. 

individual sales. Berrett-Koehler publications are available through most book- 
stores. They can also be ordered direct from Berrett-Koehler: Tel: (800) 929-2929: 
Fax: (802) 864-7626; www.bkconnection.com 

orders for college textbook/course adoption usk. Please contact Berrett- 
Koehler: Tel: (800) 929-2929; Fax: (802) 864-7626. 

ORDERS BY U.S. TRADE BOOKSTORES AND WHOLESALERS. Please Contact 

Publishers Group West, 1700 Fourth Street, Berkeley, CA 94710. Tel: (510) 528-1444; 

Fax: (510) 528-3444. 

Berrett-Koehler and the BK logo are registered trademarks of 

Berrett-Koehler Publishers, Inc. 

Printed in the United States of America 

Berrett-Koehler books arc printed on long-lasting acid-free paper. When it is available, 

we choose paper that has been manufactured by environmentally responsible processes. 

These may include using trees grown in sustainable forests, incorporating recycled paper, 

minimizing chlorine in bleaching, or recycling the energy produced at the paper mill. 

LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOOING-IN-PUBLICATION DATA 

Perkins, John, 1945 

Confessions of an economic hit man / by John Perkins. 

p. cm. 
Includes bibliographical references and index. 
ISBN-10: 1-57675-301-8: ISBN-13: 978-1-57675-301-9 

I. Perkins, John. 1945- 2. United States. National Security Agency— Biography. 

3. Economists— United States— Biography. 4. Energy consultants— United States- 
Biography. 5. Intelligence agents— United States— Biography. 6. Chas. T. Main, Inc. 
7. World Bank— Developing countries. 8. Corporations, American — Foreign countries. 
9. Corporations, American— Corrupt practices. 10. Imperialism— History— 20th century. 

II. Imperialism— History— 21st century I. Title. 
UB271.U52P47 2004 
332'.042'092-dc22 

[B] 2004045,353 

First Edition 

09 08 07 06 05 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 

Cover design by Mark van Bronkhorst. Interior design by Valerie Brewster. 

Copyediting by Todd Manza. Indexing by Rachel Rice. 



To my mother and father, Ruth Moody and Jason Perkins, 
who taught me about love and living and instilled 

i in me the courage that enabled me 
/ to write this book. 



CONTENTS 



Preface ix 
Prologue xvi 

PART I: 1963-1971 

1 An Economic Hit Man Is Born 3 

2\ "In for Life" 12 

3s Indonesia: Lessons for an EHM 20 

4 Saving a Country from Communism 23 

5 Selling My Soul 28 

PART II: 1971-1975 

6 My Role as Inquisitor 37 

7 Civilization on Trial 42 

8 Jesus, Seen Differently 47 

9 Opportunity of a Lifetime 52 

10 Panama's President and Hero 58 

11 Pirates in the Canal Zone 63 

12 Soldiers and Prostitutes 67 

1 3 Conversations with the General 71 

14 Entering a New and Sinister Period in 
Economic History ^6 

15 The Saudi Arabian Money-laundering Affair 81 

1 6 Pimping, and Financing Osama bin Laden 93 



PART Mi: 1975-T981 

17 Panama Canal Negotiations and Graham Greene 101 

18 Iran's King of Kings 108 

19 Confessions of a Tortured Alan 113 

20 The Fall of a King 117 

21 Colombia: Keystone of Latin America 120 

22 American Republic versus Global Empire 124 

23 The Deceptive Resume 131 

24 Ecuador's President Battles Big Oil 141 

25 I Quit 146 

PART IV: 1981-PRESENT 

26 Ecuador's Presidential Death 153 

27 Panama: Another Presidential Death 158 

28 My Energy Company, Enron, and George W. Bush 162 

29 I Take a Bribe 167 

30 The United States Invades Panama 173 

31 An EHM Failure in Iraq 182 

32 September 11 and its Aftermath for Me, Personally 189 

33 Venezuela: Saved by Saddam 196 

34 Ecuador Revisited 203 

35 Piercing the Veneer 211 

Epilogue 221 

John Perkins Personal History 226 

Notes 230 

Index 240 

About the Author 248 



Confessions of an Economic Hit Man 



PREFACE 



Economic hit men (EHMs) are highly paid professionals 
who cheat countries around the globe out of trillions of 
dollars. They funnel money from the World Bank, the 
U.S. Agency for International Development ( USAID), 
and other foreign "aid" organizations into the coffers of 
huge corporations and the pockets of a few wealthy fami- 
lies who control the planet's natural resources. Their tools 
include fraudulent financial reports, rigged elections, 
payoffs, extortion, sex, and murder. They play a game as 
old as empire, but one that has taken on new and terrify- 
ing dimensions during this time of globalization. 
I should know; I was an EHM. 

I wrote that in 1982, as the beginning of a book with the working 
title, Conscience of an Economic Hit Man. The book was dedicated to 
the presidents of two countries, men who had been my clients, 
whom I respected and thought of as kindred spirits — Jaime Roldos, 
president of Ecuador, and Omar Torrijos, president of Panama. Both 
had just died in fiery crashes. Their deaths were not accidental. They 
were assassinated because they opposed that fraternity of corporate, 
government, and banking heads whose goal is global empire. We 
EHMs failed to bring Roldos and Torrijos around, and the other type 
of hit men, the CIA-sanctioned jackals who were always right behind 
us, stepped in. 

I was persuaded to stop writing that book. I started it four more 
times during the next twenty years. On each occasion, my decision to 
begin again was influenced by current world events: the U.S. invasion 
of Panama in 1989, the first Gulf War, Somalia, the rise of Osama bin 
Laden. However, threats or bribes always convinced me to stop. 

In 2003, the president of a major publishing house that is owned 
by a powerful international corporation read a draft of what had 
now become Confessions of an Economic Hit Man. He described it 



as "a riveting story that needs to be told." Then he smiled sadly, 
shook his head, and told me that since the executives at world head- 
quarters might object, he could not afford to risk publishing it. He 
advised me to fictionalize it. "We could market you in the mold of a 
novelist like John Le Carre or Graham Greene." 

But this is not fiction. It is the true story of my life. A more coura- 
geous publisher, one not owned by an international corporation, has 
agreed to help me tell it. 

This story must be told. We live in a time of terrible crisis — and 
tremendous opportunity. The story of this particular economic hit 
man is the story of how we got to where we are and why we currently 
face crises that seem insurmountable. This story must be told be- 
cause only by understanding our past mistakes will we be able to 
take advantage of future opportunities; because 9/11 happened and 
so did the second war in Iraq; because in addition to the three thou- 
sand people who died on September 11, 2001, at the hands of ter- 
rorists, another twenty-four thousand died from hunger and related 
causes. In fact, twenty-four thousand people die every single day 
because they are unable to obtain life-sustaining food. 1 Most im- 
portantly, this story must be told because today, for the first time in 
history, one nation has the ability, the money, and the power to 
change all this. It is the nation where I was born and the one I served 
as an EHM: the United States of America. 

What finally convinced me to ignore the threats and bribes? 

The short answer is that my only child, Jessica, graduated from 
college and went out into the world on her own. When I recently 
told her that I was considering publishing this book and shared my 
fears with her, she said, "Don't worry, dad. If they get you, I'll take 
over where you left off. We need to do this for the grandchildren I 
hope to give you someday!" That is the short answer. 

The longer version relates to my dedication to the country where 
I was raised, to my love of the ideals expressed by our Founding Fa- 
thers, to my deep commitment to the American republic that today 
promises "life, liberty', and the pursuit of happiness" for all people, 
everywhere, and to my determination after 9/11 not to sit idly by any 
longer while EHMs turn that republic into a global empire. That is 
the skeleton version of the long answer; the flesh and blood are 
added in the chapters that follow. 

This is a true story. I lived every minute of it. The sights, the people, 

x Confessions of an Economic Hit Man 



the conversations, and the feelings I describe were all a part of my 
life. It is my personal story, and yet it happened within the larger 
context of world events that have shaped our history, have brought 
us to where we are today, and form the foundation of our children's 
futures. I have made every effort to present these experiences, people, 
and conversations accurately. Whenever I discuss historical events 
or re-create conversations with other people, I do so with the help of 
several tools: published documents; personal records and notes; rec- 
ollections — my own and those of others who participated; the five 
manuscripts I began previously; and historical accounts by other 
authors, most notably recently published ones that disclose infor- 
mation that formerly was classified or otherwise unavailable. Refer- 
ences are provided in the endnotes, to allow interested readers to 
pursue these subjects in more depth. In some cases, I combine sev- 
eral dialogues I had with a person into one conversation to facilitate 
the flow of the narrative. 

My publisher asked whether we actually referred to ourselves as 
economic hit men. I assured him that we did, although usually only 
by the initials. In fact, on the day in 1971 when I began working with 
my teacher Claudine, she informed me, "My assignment is to mold 
you into an economic hit man. No one can know about your in- 
volvement — not even your wife." Then she turned serious. "Once 
you're in, you're in for life." 

Claudine's role is a fascinating example of the manipulation that 
underlies the business I had entered. Beautiful and intelligent, she 
was highly effective; she understood my weaknesses and used them 
to her greatest advantage. Her job and the way she executed it ex- 
emplify the subtlety of the people behind this system. 

Claudine pulled no punches when describing what I would be 
called upon to do. My job, she said, was "to encourage world leaders 
to become part of a vast network that promotes U.S. commercial in- 
terests. In the end, those leaders become ensnared in a web of debt 
that ensures their loyalty. We can draw on them whenever we desire 
— to satisfy our political, economic, or military needs. In turn, they 
bolster their political positions by bringing industrial parks, power 
plants, and airports to their people. The owners of U.S. engineer- 
ing/construction companies become fabulously wealthy." 

Today we see the results of this system run amok. Executives at 
our most respected companies hire people at near-slave wages to 



Preface sei 



toil under inhuman conditions in Asian sweatshops. Oil companies 
wantonly pump toxins into rain forest rivers, consciously killing 
people, animals, and plants, and committing genocide among ancient 
cultures. The pharmaceutical industry denies lifesaving medicines to 
millions of HIV-infected Africans. Twelve million families in our 
own United States worry about their next meal. 2 The energy indus- 
try creates an Enron. The accounting industry creates an Andersen. 
The income ratio of the one-rifth of the world's population in the 
wealthiest countries to the one-fifth in the poorest went from 30 to 1 
in I960 to 74 to 1 in 1995. 3 The United States spends over $87 bil- 
lion conducting a war in Iraq while the United Nations estimates 
that for less than half that amount we could provide clean water, ad- 
equate diets, sanitation services, and basic education to every person 
on the planet. 4 

And we wonder why terrorists attack us? 

Some would blame our current problems on an organized con- 
spiracy. I wish it were so simple. Members of a conspiracy can be 
rooted out and brought to justice. This system, however, is fueled by 
something far more dangerous than conspiracy. It is driven not by a 
small band of men but by a concept that has become accepted as 
gospel: the idea that all economic growth benefits humankind and 
that the greater the growth, the more widespread the benefits. This 
belief also has a corollary: that those people who excel at stoking the 
fires of economic growth should be exalted and rewarded, while 
those born at the fringes are available for exploitation. 

The concept is, of course, erroneous. We know that in many coun- 
tries economic growth benefits only a small portion of the popula- 
tion and may in fact result in increasingly desperate circumstances 
for the majority. This effect is reinforced by the corollary belief that 
the captains of industry who drive this system should enjoy a special 
status, a belief that is the root of many of our current problems and 
is perhaps also the reason why conspiracy theories abound. When 
men and women are rewarded for greed, greed becomes a corrupt- 
ing motivator. When we equate the gluttonous consumption of the 
earth's resources with a status approaching sainthood, when we 
teach our children to emulate people who live unbalanced lives, and 
when we define huge sections of the population as subservient to an 
elite minority, we ask for trouble. And we get it. 

In their drive to advance the global empire, corporations, banks, 

a,'ii Confessions of an Economic Hit Man 



and governments (collectively the corporatocracy) use their financial 
and political muscle to ensure that our schools, businesses, and media 
support both the fallacious concept and its corollary. They have 
brought us to a point where our global culture is a monstrous ma- 
chine that requires exponentially increasing amounts of fuel and 
maintenance, so much so that in the end it will have consumed 
even-thing in sight and will be left with no choice but to devour itself. 

The corporatocracy is not a conspiracy, but its members do 
endorse common values and goals. One of corporatocracy's most im- 
portant functions is to perpetuate and continually expand and 
strengthen the system. The lives of those who "make it," and their 
accoutrements — their mansions, yachts, and private jets — are pre- 
sented as models to inspire us all to consume, consume, consume. 
Every opportunity is taken to convince us that purchasing things is 
our civiJxluty, that pillaging the earth is good for the economy and 
therefore serves our higher interests. People like me are paid out- 
rageously high salaries to do the system's bidding. If we falter, a more 
malicious form of hit man, the jackal, steps to the plate. And if the 
jackal fails, then the job falls to the military. 

This book is the confession of a man who, back when I was an 
EHM, was part of a relatively small group. People who play similar 
roles are more abundant now. They have more euphemistic titles, 
and they walk the corridors of Monsanto, General Electric, Nike, 
General Motors, Wal-Mart, and nearly every other major corpora- 
tion in the world. In a very real sense, Confessions of an Economic 
Hit Man is their story as well as mine. 

It is your story too, the story of your world and mine, of the first 
truly global empire. History tells us that unless we modify this story, 
it is guaranteed to end tragically. Empires never last. Everyone of them 
has failed terribly. They destroy many cultures as they race toward 
greater domination, and then they themselves fall. No country or com- 
bination of countries can thrive in the long term by exploiting others. 

This book was written so that we may take heed and remold our 
story. I am certain that when enough of us become aware of how we 
are being exploited by the economic engine that creates an insatiable 
appetite for the world's resources, and results in systems that foster 
slavery, we will no longer tolerate it. We will reassess our role in a 
world where a few swim in riches and the majority drown in poverty, 
pollution, and violence. We will commit ourselves to navigating a 

Preface xiii 



course toward compassion, democracy, and social justice for all. 

Admitting to a problem is the first step toward finding a solution. 
Confessing a sin is the beginning of redemption. Let this book, then, 
be the start of our salvation. Let it inspire us to new levels of dedi- 
cation and drive us to realize our dream of balanced and honorable 
societies. 



Without the many people whose lives I shared and who are de- 
scribed in the following pages, this book would not have been written. 
I am grateful for the experiences and the lessons. 

Beyond them, I thank the people who encouraged me to go out 
on a limb and tell my story: Stephan Rechtschaffen, Bill and Lynne 
Twist, Ann Kemp, Art Roffey so many of the people who partici- 
pated in Dream Change trips and workshops, especially my co- 
facilitators, Eve Bruce, Lyn Roberts- Herrick, and Mary Tendall, and 
my incredible wife and partner of twenty-five years, Winifred, and 
our daughter Jessica. 

I am grateful to the many men and women who provided per- 
sonal insights and information about the multinational banks, 
international corporations, and political innuendos of various coun- 
tries, with special thanks to Michael Ben-Eli, Sabrina Bologni, Juan 
Gabriel Carrasco, Jamie Grant, Paul Shaw, and several others, who 
wish to remain anonymous but who know who you are. 

Once the manuscript was written, Berrett-Koehler founder Steven 
Piersanti not only had the courage to take me in but also devoted 
endless hours as a brilliant editor, helping me to frame and reframe 
the book. My deepest thanks go to Steven, to Richard Perl, who in- 
troduced me to him, and also to Nova Brown, Randi Fiat, Allen Jones, 
Chris Lee, Jennifer Liss, Laurie Pellouchoud, and Jenny Williams, 
who read and critiqued the manuscript; to David Korten, who not 
only read and critiqued it but also made me jump through hoops to 
satisfy his high and excellent standards; to Paul Fedorko, my agent; 
to Valerie Brewster for crafting the book design; and to Todd Manza, 
my copy editor, a wordsmith and philosopher extraordinaire. 

A special word of gratitude to Jeevan Sivasubramanian, Berrett- 
Koehler's managing editor, and to Ken Lupoff, Rick Wilson, Maria 

xiv Confessions of an Economic Hit Man 



Jesus Aguilo, Pat Anderson, Marina Cook, Michael Crowley, Robin 
Donovan, Kristen Frantz, Tiffany Lee, Catherine Lengronne, Dianne 
Platner — all the BK staff who recognize the need to raise con- 
sciousness and who work tirelessly to make this world a better place. 

I must thank all those men and women who worked with me at 
MAIN and were unaware of the roles they played in helping EHM 
shape the global empire; I especially thank the ones who worked for 
me and with whom I traveled to distant lands and shared so many 
precious moments. Also Ehud Sperling and his staff at Inner Tradi- 
tions International, publisher of my earlier books on indigenous cul- 
tures and shamanism, and good friends who set me on this path as 
an author. 

I am eternally grateful to the men and women who took me into 
their homes in the jungles, deserts, and mountains, in the cardboard 
shacks along the canals of Jakarta, and in the slums of countless 
cities around the world, who shared their food and their lives with 
me and who have been my greatest source of inspiration. 

John Perkins 
August 2004 



Preface seo 



PROLOGUE 



Quito, Ecuador's capital, stretches across a volcanic valley high in 
the Andes, at an altitude of nine thousand feet. Residents of this city, 
which was founded long before Columbus arrived in the Americas, 
are accustomed to seeing snow on the surrounding peaks, despite 
the fact that they live just a tew miles south of the equator. 

The city of Shell, a frontier outpost and military base hacked out 
of Ecuador's Amazon jungle to service the oil company whose name 
it bears, is nearly eight thousand feet lower than Quito. A steaming 
city, it is inhabited mostly by soldiers, oil workers, and the indige- 
nous people from the Shuar and Kichwa tribes who work for them as 
prostitutes and laborers. 

To journey from one city to the other, you must travel a road that 
is both tortuous and breathtaking. Local people will tell you that 
during the trip you experience all four seasons in a single day. 

Although I have driven this road many times, I never tire of the 
spectacular scenery. Sheer cliffs, punctuated by cascading waterfalls 
and brilliant bromeliads, rise up one side. On the other side, the earth 
drops abruptly into a deep abyss where the Pastaza River, a head- 
water of the Amazon, snakes its way down the Andes. The Pastaza 
carries water from the glaciers of Cotopaxi, one of the world's highest 
active volcanoes and a deity in the time of the Incas, to the Atlantic 
Ocean over three thousand miles away. 

In 2003, 1 departed Quito in a Subaru Outback and headed for 
Shell on a mission that was like no other I had ever accepted. I was 
hoping to end a war I had helped create. As is the case with so many 
things we EHMs must take responsibility for, it is a war that is vir- 
tually unknown anywhere outside the country where it is fought. I 
was on my way to meet with the Shuars, the Kichwas, and their 
neighbors the Achuars, the Zaparos, and the Shiwiars — tribes de- 
termined to prevent our oil companies from destroying their homes, 
families, and lands, even if it means they must die in the process. For 
them, this is a war about the survival of their children and cultures, 
while for us it is about power, money, and natural resources. It is one 



part of the struggle for world domination and the dream of a few 
greedy men, global empire. 1 

That is what we EHMs do best: we build a global empire. We are 
an elite group of men and women who utilize international financial 
organizations to foment conditions that make other nations sub- 
servient to the corporatocracy running our biggest corporations, our 
government, and our banks. Like our counterparts in the Mafia, 
EHMs provide favors. These take the form of loans to develop in- 
frastructure — electric generating plants, highways, ports, airports, 
or industrial parks. A condition of such loans is that engineering and 
construction companies from our own country must build all these 
projects. In essence, most of the money never leaves the United 
States; it is simply transferred from banking offices in Washington to 
engineering offices in New York, Houston, or San Francisco. 

Despite the fact that the money is returned almost immediately 
to corporations that are members of the corporatocracy (the credi- 
tor), the recipient country is required to pay it all back, principal 
plus interest. If an EHM is completely successful, the loans are so 
large that the debtor is forced to default on its payments after a few 
years. When this happens, then like the Mafia we demand our pound 
of flesh. This often includes one or more of the following: control 
over United Nations votes, the installation of military bases, or access 
to precious resources such as oil or the Panama Canal. Of course, the 
debtor still owes us the money— and another country is added to 
our global empire. 

Driving from Quito toward Shell on this sunny day in 2003, I 
thought back thirty-five years to the first time I arrived in this part 
of the world. I had read that although Ecuador is only about the size 
of Nevada, it has more than thirty active volcanoes, over 15 percent 
of the world's bird species, and thousands of as-yet-unclassified 
plants, and that it is a land of diverse cultures where nearly as many 
people speak ancient indigenous languages as speak Spanish. I 
found it fascinating and certainly exotic; yet, the words that kept 
coming to mind back then were pure, untouched, and innocent. 

Much has changed in thirty-five years. 

At the time of my first visit in 1968, Texaco had only just discov- 
ered petroleum in Ecuador's Amazon region. Today, oil accounts for 
nearly half the country's exports. A trans-Andean pipeline built 
shortly after my first visit has since leaked over a half million barrels 



Prologue xvii 



of oil into the fragile rain forest— more than twice the amount spilled 
by the Exxon Valdcz.' 2 Today, a new $1.3 billion, three hundred-mile 
pipeline constructed by an EHM-organized consortium promises to 
make Ecuador one of the world's top ten suppliers of oil to the United 
States. 3 Vast areas of rain forest have fallen, macaws and jaguars 
have all but vanished, three Ecuadorian indigenous cultures have 
been driven to the verge of collapse, and pristine rivers have been 
transformed into naming cesspools. 

During this same period, the indigenous cultures began fighting 
back. For instance, on May 7, 2003, a group of American lawyers 
representing more than thirty thousand indigenous Ecuadorian 
people filed a $1 billion lawsuit against ChevronTexaco Corp. The 
suit asserts that between 1971 and 1992 the oil giant dumped into 
open holes and rivers over four million gallons per day of toxic 
wastewater contaminated with oil, heavy metals, and carcinogens, 
and that the company left behind nearly 350 uncovered waste pits 
that continue to kill both people and animals. 4 

Outside the window of my Outback, great clouds of mist rolled in 
from the forests and up the Pastaza's canyons. Sweat soaked my shirt, 
and my stomach began to churn, but not just from the intense trop- 
ical heat and the serpentine twists in the road. Knowing the part I 
had played in destroying this beautiful country was once again taking 
its toll. Because of my fellow EHMs and me, Ecuador is in far worse 
shape today than she was before we introduced her to the miracles of 
modern economics, banking, and engineering. Since 1970, during 
this period known euphemistically as the Oil Boom, the official 
poverty level grew from 50 to 70 percent, under- or unemployment 
increased from 15 to 70 percent, and public debt increased from 
$240 million to $16 billion. Meanwhile, the share of national resources 
allocated to the poorest segments of the population declined from 
20 to 6 percent. 5 

Unfortunately, Ecuador is not the exception. Nearly every country 
we EHMs have brought under the global empire's umbrella has suf- 
fered a similar fate. 6 Third world debt has grown to more than S2.5 
trillion, and the cost of servicing it — over $375 billion per year as of 
2004 — is more than all third world spending on health and educa- 
tion, and twenty times what developing countries receive annually in 
foreign aid. Over half the people in the world survive on less than two 
dollars per day, which is roughly the same amount they received 



scviii Confessions of an Economic Hit Man 



in the early 1970s. Meanwhile, the top 1 percent of third world 
households accounts for 70 to 90 percent of all private financial 
wealth and real estate ownership in their country; the actual per- 
centage depends on the specific country. 7 

The Subaru slowed as it meandered through the streets of the 
beautiful resort town of Banos, famous for the hot baths created by 
underground volcanic rivers that flow from the highly active Mount 
Tungurahgua. Children ran along beside us, waving and trying to 
sell us gum and cookies. Then we left Banos behind. The spectacu- 
lar scenery ended abruptly as the Subaru sped out of paradise and 
into a modern vision of Dante's Inferno. 

A gigantic monster reared up from the river, a mammoth gray 
wall. Its dripping concrete was totally out of place, completely un- 
natural and incompatible with the landscape. Of course, seeing it 
there should not have surprised me. I knew all along that it would be 
waiting in ambush. I had encountered it many times before and in 
the past had praised it as a symbol of EHM accomplishments. Even 
so, it made my skin crawl. 

That hideous, incongruous wall is a dam that blocks the rushing 
Pastaza River, diverts its waters through huge tunnels bored into the 
mountain, and converts the energy to electricity. This is the 156- 
megawatt Agoyan hydroelectric project. It fuels the industries that 
make a handful of Ecuadorian families wealthy, and it has been the 
source of untold suffering for the farmers and indigenous people 
who live along the river. This hydroelectric plant is just one of many 
projects developed through my efforts and those of other EHMs. 
Such projects are the reason Ecuador is now a member of the global 
empire, and the reason why the Shuars and Kichwas and their 
neighbors threaten war against our oil companies. 

Because of EHM projects, Ecuador is awash in foreign debt and 
must devote an inordinate share of its national budget to paying this 
off, instead of using its capital to help the millions of its citizens 
officially classified as dangerously impoverished. The only way Ecua- 
dor can buy down its foreign obligations is by selling its rain forests 
to the oil companies. Indeed, one of the reasons the EHMs set their 
sights on Ecuador in the first place was because the sea of oil 
beneath its Amazon region is believed to rival the oil fields of the 
Middle East. 8 The global empire demands its pound of flesh in the 
form of oil concessions. 



Prologue xix 



These demands became especially urgent after September 11, 
2001, when Washington feared that Middle Eastern supplies might 
cease. On top of that, Venezuela, our third-largest oil supplier, had 
recently elected a populist president, Hugo Chavez, who took a 
strong stand against what he referred to as U.S. imperialism; he 
threatened to cut off oil sales to the United States. The EHMs had 
failed in Iraq and Venezuela, but we had succeeded in Ecuador; now 
we would milk it for all it is worth. 

Ecuador is typical of countries around the world that EHMs have 
brought into the economic-political fold. For ever)'' $100 of crude 
taken out of the Ecuadorian rain forests, the oil companies receive 
$75. Of the remaining S25, three-quarters must go to paying off the 
foreign debt. Most of the remainder covers military and other gov- 
ernment expenses — which leaves about $2.50 for health, education, 
and programs aimed at helping the poor. 9 Thus, out of every $100 
worth of oil torn from the Amazon, less than $3 goes to the people 
who need the money most, those whose lives have been so adversely 
impacted by the dams, the drilling, and the pipelines, and who are 
dying from lack of edible food and potable water. 

All of those people — millions in Ecuador, billions around the 
planet — are potential terrorists. Not because they believe in com- 
munism or anarchism or are intrinsically evil, but simply because 
they are desperate. Looking at this dam, I wondered — as I have so 
often in so many places around the world— when these people 
would take action, like the Americans against England in the 1770s 
or Latin Americans against Spain in the early 1800s. 

The subtlety of this modern empire building puts the Roman 
centurions, the Spanish conquistadors, and the eighteenth- and 
nineteenth-century European colonial powers to shame. We EHMs 
are crafty; we learned from history. Today we do not carry swords. 
We do not wear armor or clothes that set us apart. In countries like 
Ecuador, Nigeria, and Indonesia, we dress like local schoolteachers 
and shop owners. In Washington and Paris, we look like government 
bureaucrats and bankers. We appear humble, normal. We visit project 
sites and stroll through impoverished villages. We profess altruism, 
talk with local papers about the wonderful humanitarian things we 
are doing. We cover the conference tables of government committees 
with our spreadsheets and financial projections, and we lecture at 
the Harvard Business School about the miracles of macroeconomics. 



xx Confessions of an Economic Hit Man 



We are on the record, in the open. Or so we portray ourselves and so 
are we accepted. It is how the system works. We seldom resort to 
anything illegal because the system itself is built on subterfuge, and 
the system is by definition legitimate. 

However — and this is a very large caveat — if we fail, an even 
more sinister breed steps in, ones we EHMs refer to as the jackals, 
men who trace their heritage directly to those earlier empires. The 
jackals are always there, lurking in the shadows. When they emerge, 
heads of state are overthrown or die in violent "accidents." 10 And if 
by chance the jackals fail, as they failed in Afghanistan and Iraq, 
then the old models resurface. When the jackals fail, young Ameri- 
cans are sent in to kill and to die. 

As I passed the monster, that hulking mammoth wall of gray con- 
crete rising from the river, I was very conscious of the sweat that 
soaked myclothes and of the tightening in my intestines. I headed 
on down intcHhe jungle to meet with the indigenous people who are 
determined to fight to the last man in order to stop this empire I 
helped create, and I was overwhelmed with feelings of guilt. 

How, I asked myself, did a nice kid from rural New Hampshire 
ever get into such a dirty business? 



Prologue xxi 



PART 1: 1963-1971 



^ 



CHAPTER 1 

An Economic Hit Man Is Born 



It began innocently enough. 

I was an only child, born into the middle class in 1945. Both my 
parents came from three centuries of New England Yankee stock; 
their strict, moralistic, staunchly Republican attitudes reflected 
generations of puritanical ancestors. They were the first in their fam- 
ilies to attend college — on scholarships. My mother became a high 
school Latin teacher. My father joined World War II as a Navy lieu- 
tenant and was in charge of the armed guard gun crew on a highly 
flammable merchant marine tanker in the Atlantic. When I was 
born, in Hanover, New Hampshire, he was recuperating from a bro- 
ken hip in a Texas hospital. I did not see him until I was a year old. 

He took a job teaching languages at Tilton School, a boys' board- 
ing school in rural New Hampshire. The campus stood high on a 
hill, proudly— some would say arrogantly — towering over the town 
of the same name. This exclusive institution limited its enrollment to 
about fifty students in each grade level, nine through twelve. The 
students were mostly the scions of wealthy families from Buenos 
Aires, Caracas, Boston, and New York. 

My family was cash starved; however, we most certainly did not 
see ourselves as poor. Although the school's teachers received very 
little salary, all our needs were provided free: food, housing, heat, 
water, and the workers who mowed our lawn and shoveled our snow. 
Beginning on my fourth birthday, I ate in the prep school dining 



room, shagged balls for the soccer teams my dad coached, and 
handed out towels in the locker room. 

It is an understatement to say that the teachers and their wives 
felt superior to the locals. I used to hear my parents joking about be- 
ing the lords of the manor, ruling over the lowly peasants — the 
townies. I knew it was more than a joke. 

My elementary and middle school friends belonged to that peasant 
class; they were very poor. Their parents were dirt farmers, lumber- 
jacks, and mill workers. They resented "the preppies on the hill," and 
in turn, my father and mother discouraged me from socializing with 
the townie girls, who they called "tarts" and "sluts." I had shared 
schoolbooks and crayons with these girls since first grade, and over 
the years, I fell in love with three of them: Ann, Priscilla, and Judy. 
I had a hard time understanding my parents' perspective; however, 
I deferred to their wishes. 

Every year we spent the three months of my dad's summer vacation 
at a lake cottage built by my grandfather in 1921. It was surrounded 
by forests, and at night we could hear owls and mountain lions. We 
had no neighbors; I was the only child within walking distance. In 
the early years, I passed the days by pretending that the trees were 
knights of the Round Table and damsels in distress named Ann, 
Priscilla, or Judy (depending on the year). My passion was, I had no 
doubt, as strong as that of Lancelot for Guinevere — and even more 
secretive. 

At fourteen, I received free tuition to Tilton School. With my par- 
ents' prodding, I rejected everything to do with the town and never 
saw my old friends again. When my new classmates went home to 
their mansions and penthouses for vacation, I remained alone on the 
hill. Their girlfriends were debutantes; I had no girlfriends. All the girls 
I knew were "sluts"; I had cast them off, and they had forgotten me. 
I was alone — and terribly frustrated. 

My parents were masters at manipulation; they assured me that 
I was privileged to have such an opportunity and that some day I 
would be grateful. I would find the perfect wife, one suited to our 
high moral standards. Inside, though, I seethed. I craved female com- 
panionship — sex; the idea of a slut was most alluring. 

However, rather than rebelling, I repressed my rage and expressed 
my frustration by excelling. I was an honor student, captain of two 
varsity teams, editor of the school newspaper. I was determined to 

4 Part 1: 1963-1971 



show up my rich classmates and to leave Tilton behind forever. Dur- 
ing my senior year, I was awarded a full athletic scholarship to Brown 
and an academic scholarship to Middlebury. I chose Brown, mainly 
because I preferred being an athlete — and because it was located in 
a city. My mother had graduated from Middlebury and my father 
had received his master's degree there, so even though Brown was in 
the Ivy League, they preferred Middlebury. 

"What if you break your leg?" my father asked. "Better to take the 
academic scholarship." I buckled. 

Middlebury was, in my perception, merely an inflated version of 
Tilton — albeit in rural Vermont instead of rural New Hampshire. 
True, it was coed, but I was poor and most everyone else was wealthy, 
and I had not attended school with a female in four years. I lacked 
confidence, felt outclassed, was miserable. I pleaded with my dad to 
let me drop out or take a year off. I wanted to move to Boston and 
learn about life and women. He would not hear of it. "How can I pre- 
tend to prepare other parents' kids for college if my own won't stay 
in one?" he asked. 

I have come to understand that life is composed of a series of 
coincidences. How we react to these — how we exercise what some 
refer to as free will — is everything; the choices we make within the 
boundaries of the twists of fate determine who we are. Two major 
coincidences that shaped my life occurred at Middlebury. One came 
in the form of an Iranian, the son of a general who was a personal 
advisor to the shah; the other was a beautiful young woman named 
Ann, like my childhood sweetheart. 

The first, whom I will call Farhad, had played professional soccer 
in Rome. He was endowed with an athletic physique, curly black 
hair, soft walnut eyes, and a background and charisma that made 
him irresistible to women. He was my opposite in many ways. I 
worked hard to win his friendship, and he taught me many things 
that would serve me well in the years to come. I also met Ann. Al- 
though she was seriously dating a young man who attended another 
college, she took me under her wing. Our platonic relationship was 
the first truly loving one I had ever experienced. 

Farhad encouraged me to drink, party, and ignore my parents. I 
consciously chose to stop studying. I decided I would break my aca- 
demic leg to get even with my father. My grades plummeted; I lost 
my scholarship. Halfway through my sophomore year, I elected to 

An Economic Hit Man Is Born 5 



drop out. My father threatened to disown me; Farhad egged me on. 
I stormed into the dean's office and quit school. It was a pivotal mo- 
ment in my life. 

Farhad and I celebrated my last night in town together at a local 
bar. A drunken farmer, a giant of a man, accused me of flirting with 
his wife, picked me up off my feet, and hurled me against a wall. 
Farhad stepped between us, drew a knife, and slashed the farmer 
open at the cheek. Then he dragged me across the room and shoved 
me through a window, out onto a ledge high above Otter Creek. We 
jumped and made our way along the river and back to our dorm. 

The next morning, when interrogated by the campus police, I lied 
and refused to admit any knowledge of the incident. Nevertheless, 
Farhad was expelled. We both moved to Boston and shared an apart- 
ment there. I landed a job at Hearst's Record American /Sunday Ad- 
vertiser newspapers, as a personal assistant to the editor in chief of 
the Sunday Advertiser. 

Later that year, 1965, several of my friends at the newspaper were 
drafted. To avoid a similar fate, I entered Boston University's College 
of Business Administration. By then, Ann had broken up with her 
old boyfriend, and she often traveled down from Middlebury to visit. 
I welcomed her attention. She graduated in 1967, while I still had 
another year to complete at BU. She adamantly refused to move in 
with me until we were married. Although I joked about being black- 
mailed, and in fact did resent what I saw as a continuation of my 
parents' archaic and prudish set of moral standards, I enjoyed our 
times together and I wanted more. We married. 

Ann's father, a brilliant engineer, had masterminded the naviga- 
tional system for an important class of missile and was rewarded 
with a high-level position in the Department of the Navy. His best 
friend, a man Ann called Uncle Frank (not his real name), was em- 
ployed as an executive at the highest echelons of the National Secu- 
rity Agency (NSA), the country's least-known — and by most accounts 
largest — spy organization. 

Shortly after our marriage, the military summoned me for my 
physical. I passed and therefore faced the prospect of Vietnam upon 
graduation. The idea of fighting in Southeast Asia tore me apart 
emotionally, though war has always fascinated me. I was raised on 
tales about my colonial ancestors — who include Thomas Paine and 
Ethan Allen — and I had visited all the New England and upstate 



Part 1: 1963-1971 



New York battle sites of both the French and Indian and the Revo- 
lutionary wars. I read every historical novel I could find. In fact, 
when Army Special Forces units first entered Southeast Asia. I was 
eager to sign up. But as the media exposed the atrocities and the in- 
consistencies of U.S. policy, I experienced a change of heart. I found 
myself wondering whose side Paine would have taken. I was sure he 
would have joined our Vietcong enemies. 

Uncle Frank came to my rescue. He informed me that an NSA job 
made one eligible for draft deferment, and he arranged for a series of 
meetings at his agency, including a day of grueling polygraph- 
monitored interviews. I was told that these tests would determine 
whether I was suitable material for NSA recruitment and training, 
and if I was, would provide a profile of my strengths and weaknesses, 
which would be used to map out my career. Given my attitude to- 
ward the Vietnam War, I was convinced I would fail the tests. 

Under examination, I admitted that as a loyal American I op- 
posed the war, and I was surprised when the interviewers did not 
pursue this subject. Instead, they focused on my upbringing, my 
attitudes toward my parents, the emotions generated by the fact I 
grew up as a poor puritan among so many wealthy, hedonistic prep- 
pies. They also explored my frustration about the lack of women, sex, 
and money in my life, and the fantasy world that had evolved as a re- 
sult. I was amazed by the attention they gave to my relationship with 
Farhad and by their interest in my willingness to lie to the campus 
police to protect him. 

At first I assumed all these things that seemed so negative to me 
marked me as an NSA reject, but the interviews continued, suggest- 
ing otherwise. It was not until several years later that I realized that 
from an NSA viewpoint these negatives actually are positive. Their 
assessment had less to do with issues of loyalty to my country than 
with the frustrations of my life. Anger at my parent, an obsession 
with women, and my ambition to live the good life gave them a 
hook; I was seducible. My determination to excel in school and in 
sports, my ultimate rebellion against my father, my ability to get 
along with foreigners, and my willingness to lie to the police were 
exactly the types of attributes they sought. I also discovered, later, 
that Farhad's father worked for the U.S. intelligence community in 
Iran; my friendship with Farhad was therefore a definite plus. 

A few weeks after the NSA testing, I was offered a job to start 

An Economic Hit Man Is Born 7 



training in the art of spying, to begin after I received my degree from 
BU several months later. However, before I had officially accepted 
this offer, I impulsively attended a seminar given at BU by a Peace 
Corps recruiter. A major selling point was that, like the NSA, Peace 
Corps jobs made one eligible for draft deferments. 

The decision to sit in on that seminar was one of those coincidences 
that seemed insignificant at the time but turned out to have life- 
changing implications. The recruiter described several places in 
the world that especially needed volunteers. One of these was the 
Amazon rain forest where, he pointed out, indigenous people lived 
very much as natives of North America had until the arrival of 
Europeans. 

I had always dreamed of living like the Abnakis who inhabited 
New Hampshire when my ancestors first settled there. I knew I had 
Abnaki blood in my veins, and I wanted to learn the type of forest 
lore they understood so well. I approached the recruiter after his talk 
and asked about the possibility of being assigned to the Amazon. He 
assured me there was a great need for volunteers in that region and 
that my chances would be excellent. I called Uncle Frank. 

To my surprise, Uncle Frank encouraged me to consider the Peace 
Corps. He confided that after the fall of Hanoi — which in those days 
was deemed a certainty by men in his position — the Amazon 
would become a hot spot. 

"Loaded with oil," he said. "We'll need good agents there — people 
who understand the natives." He assured me that the Peace Corps 
would be an excellent training ground, and he urged me to become 
proficient in Spanish as well as in local indigenous dialects. "You 
might," he chuckled, "end up working for a private company instead 
of the government." 

I did not understand what he meant by that at the time. I was be- 
ing upgraded from spy to EHM, although I had never heard the 
term and would not for a few more years. I had no idea that there 
were hundreds of men and women scattered around the world, 
working for consulting firms and other private companies, people 
who never received a penny of salary from any government agency 
and yet were serving the interests of empire. Nor could I have 
guessed that a new type, with more euphemistic titles, would num- 
ber in the thousands by the end of the millennium, and that I would 
play a significant role in shaping this growing army. 

8 Part 1: 1963-1971 



Ann and I applied to the Peace Corps and requested an assign- 
ment in the Amazon. When our acceptance notification arrived, my 
first reaction was one of extreme disappointment. The letter stated 
that we would be sent to Ecuador. 

Oh no, I thought. I requested the Amazon, not Africa. 

I went to an atlas and looked up Ecuador. I was dismayed when 
I could not find it anywhere on the African continent. In the index, 
though, I discovered that it is indeed located in Latin America, and 
I saw on the map that the river systems flowing off its Andean gla- 
ciers form the headwaters to the mighty Amazon. Further reading 
assured me that Ecuador's jungles were some of the world's most di- 
verse and formidable, and that the indigenous people still lived 
much as they had for millennia. We accepted. 

Ann and I completed Peace Corps training in Southern California 
and headed for Ecuador in September 1968. We lived in the Amazon 
with the Shuar whose lifestyle did indeed resemble that of precolo- 
nial North American natives; we also worked in the Andes with de- 
scendants of the Incas. It was a side of the world I never dreamed 
still existed. Until then, the only Latin Americans I had met were the 
wealthy preppies at the school where my father taught. I found my- 
self sympathizing with these indigenous people who subsisted on 
hunting and farming. I felt an odd sort of kinship with them. 
Somehow, they reminded me of the townies I had left behind. 

One day a man in a business suit, Einar Greve, landed at the 
airstrip in our community. He was a vice president at Chas. T. Main, 
Inc. (MAIN), an international consulting firm that kept a very low 
profile and that was in charge of studies to determine whether the 
World Bank should lend Ecuador and its neighboring countries bil- 
lions of dollars to build hydroelectric dams and other infrastructure 
projects. Einar also was a colonel in the U.S. Army Reserve. 

He started talking with me about the benefits of working for a 
company like MAIN. When I mentioned that I had been accepted by 
the NSA before joining the Peace Corps, and that I was considering 
going back to them, he informed me that he sometimes acted as an 
NSA liaison; he gave me a look that made me suspect that part of his 
assignment was to evaluate my capabilities. I now believe that he 
was updating my profile, and especially sizing up my abilities to sur- 
vive in environments most North Americans would find hostile. 

We spent a couple of days together in Ecuador, and afterward 

An Economic Hit Man Is Born 9 



communicated by mail. He asked me to send him reports assessing 
Ecuador's economic prospects. I had a small portable typewriter, 
loved to write, and was quite happy to comply with this request. 
Over a period of about a year, I sent Einar at least fifteen long letters. 
In these letters, I speculated on Ecuador's economic and political 
future, and I appraised the growing frustration among the indigenous 
communities as they struggled to confront oil companies, interna- 
tional development agencies, and other attempts to draw them into 
the modern world. 

When my Peace Corps tour was over, Einar invited me to a job 
interview at MAIN headquarters in Boston. During our private meet- 
ing, he emphasized that MAIN'S primary business was engineering 
but that his biggest client, the World Bank, recently had begun in- 
sisting that he keep economists on staff to produce the critical eco- 
nomic forecasts used to determine the feasibility and magnitude of 
engineering projects. He confided that he had previously hired three 
highly qualified economists with impeccable credentials — two with 
master's degrees and one with a PhD. They had failed miserably. 

"None of them," Einar said, "can handle the idea of producing 
economic forecasts in countries where reliable statistics aren't avail- 
able." He went on to tell me that, in addition, all of them had found 
it impossible to fulfill the terms of their contracts, which required 
them to travel to remote places in countries like Ecuador, Indonesia, 
Iran, and Egypt, to interview local leaders, and to provide personal 
assessments about the prospects for economic development in 
those regions. One had suffered a nervous breakdown in an isolated 
Panamanian village; he was escorted by Panamanian police to the 
airport and put on a plane back to the United States. 

"The letters you sent me indicate that you don't mind sticking 
your neck out, even when hard data isn't available. And given your 
living conditions in Ecuador, I'm confident you can survive almost 
anywhere." He told me that he already had fired one of those econ- 
omists and was prepared to do the same with the other two, if I 
accepted the job. 

So it was that in January 1971 1 was offered a position as an econ- 
omist with MAIN. I had turned twenty-six — the magical age when 
the draft board no longer wanted me. I consulted with Ann's family; 
they encouraged me to take the job, and I assumed this reflected Un- 
cle Frank's attitude as well. I recalled him mentioning the possibility 

10 Part 1: 1963-1971 



I would end up working for a private firm. Nothing was ever stated 
openly, but I had no doubt that my employment at MAIN was a con- 
sequence of the arrangements Uncle Frank had made three years 
earlier, in addition to my experiences in Ecuador and my willingness 
to write about that country's economic and political situation. 

My head reeled for several weeks, and I had a very swollen ego. I 
had earned only a bachelor's degree from BU, which did not seem to 
warrant a position as an economist with such a lofty consulting com- 
pany. I knew that many of my BU classmates who had been rejected 
by the draft and had gone on to earn MBAs and other graduate de- 
grees would be overcome with jealousy. I visualized myself as a dash- 
ing secret agent, heading off to exotic lands, lounging beside hotel 
swimming pools, surrounded by gorgeous bikini-clad women, mar- 
tini in hand. 

Although this was merely fantasy, I would discover that it held el- 
ements of truth. Einar had hired me as an economist, but I was soon 
to learn that my real job went far beyond that, and that it was in fact 
closer to James Bond's than I ever could have guessed. 



An Economic Hit Man Is Born 11 



CHAPTER 2 



"In for Life" 



In legal parlance, MAIN would be called a closely held corporation; 
roughly 5 percent of its two thousand employees owned the company. 
These were referred to as partners or associates, and their position 
was coveted. Not only did the partners have power over everyone 
else, but also they made the big bucks. Discretion was their hallmark; 
they dealt with heads of state and other chief executive officers who 
expect their consultants, like their attorneys and psychotherapists, to 
honor a strict code of absolute confidentiality. Talking with the press 
was taboo. It simply was not tolerated. As a consequence, hardly any- 
one outside MAIN had ever heard of us, although many were famil- 
iar with our competitors, such as Arthur D. Little, Stone & Webster, 
Brown & Root, Halliburton, and Bechtel. 

I use the term competitors loosely, because in fact MAIN was in a 
league by itself. The majority of our professional staff was engineers, 
yet we owned no equipment and never constructed so much as a 
storage shed. Many MAINers were ex-military; however, we did not 
contract with the Department of Defense or with any of the military 
services. Our stock-in-trade was something so different from the 
norm that during my first months there even I could not figure out 
what we did. I knew only that my first real assignment would be in 
Indonesia, and that I would be part of an eleven-man team sent to 
create a master energy plan for the island of Java. 

I also knew that Einar and others who discussed the job with me 
were eager to convince me that Java's economy would boom, and 



12 



that if I wanted to distinguish myself as a good forecaster (and to 
therefore be offered promotions), I would produce projections that 
demonstrated as much. 

"Right off the chart" Einar liked to say. He would glide his fingers 
through the air and up over his head. "An economy that will soar like 
a bird!" 

Einar took frequent trips that usually lasted only two to three 
days. No one talked much about them or seemed to know where he 
had gone. When he was in the office, he often invited me to sit with 
him for a few minutes over coffee. He asked about Ann, our new 
apartment, and the cat we had brought with us from Ecuador. I grew 
bolder as I came to know him better, and I tried to learn more about 
him and what I would be expected to do in my job. But I never re- 
ceived answers that satisfied me; he was a master at turning con- 
versations around. On one such occasion, he gave me a peculiar look. 

"You needn't worry," he said. "We have high expectations for you. 
I was in Washington recently..." His voice trailed off and he smiled 
inscrutably. "In any case, you know we have a big project in Kuwait. 
It'll be a while before you leave for Indonesia. I think you should use 
some of your time to read up on Kuwait. The Boston Public Library- 
is a great resource, and we can get you passes to the MIT and Harvard 
libraries." 

After that, I spent many hours in those libraries, especially in the 
BPL, which was located a few blocks away from the office and very 
close to my Back Bay apartment. I became familiar with Kuwait as well 
as with many books on economic statistics, published by the United 
Nations, the Internationa] Monetary Fund (IMF), and the World 
Bank. I knew that I would be expected to produce econometric mod- 
els for Indonesia and Java, and I decided that I might as well get 
started by doing one for Kuwait. 

However, my BS in business administration had not prepared me 
as an econometrician, so I spent a lot of time trying to figure out how 
to go about it. I went so far as to enroll in a couple of courses on the 
subject In the process, I discovered that statistics can be manipu- 
lated to produce a large array of conclusions, including those sub- 
stantiating the. predilections of the analyst. 

MAIN was a macho corporation. There were only four women 
who held professional positions in 1971- However, there were per- 
haps two hundred women divided between the cadres of personal 

"In for Life" 13 



secretaries — even 7 vice president and department manager had 
one — and the steno pool, which served the rest of us. I had become 
accustomed to this gender bias, and I was therefore especially as- 
tounded by what happened one day in the BPL's reference section. 

An attractive brunette woman came up and sat in a chair across 
the table from me. In her dark green business suit, she looked very 
sophisticated. I judged her to be several years my senior, but I tried 
to focus on not noticing her, on acting indifferent. After a few min- 
utes, without a word, she slid an open book in my direction. It con- 
tained a table with information I had been searching for about 
Kuwait — and a card with her name, Claudine Martin, and her title, 
Special Consultant to Chas. T. Main, Inc. I looked up into her soft 
green eyes, and she extended her hand. 

"I've been asked to help in your training," she said. I could not be- 
lieve this was happening to me. 

Beginning the next day, we met in Claudine's Beacon Street 
apartment, a few blocks from MAIN'S Prudential Center headquar- 
ters. During our first hour together, she explained that my position 
was an unusual one and that we needed to keep everything highly 
confidential. She told me that no one had given me specifics about 
my job because no one was authorized to — except her. Then she in- 
formed me that her assignment was to mold me into an economic 
hit man. 

The very name awakened old cloak-and-dagger dreams. I was 
embarrassed by the nervous laughter I heard coming from me. She 
smiled and assured me that humor was one of the reasons they used 
the term. "Who would take it seriously?" she asked. 

I confessed ignorance about the role of economic hit men. 

"You're not alone," she laughed. "We're a rare breed, in a dirty 
business. No one can know about your involvement — not even your 
wife." Then she turned serious. "I'll be very frank with you, teach you 
all I can during the next weeks. Then you'll have to choose. Your de- 
cision is final. Once you're in, you're in for life." After that, she sel- 
dom used the full name; we were simply EHMs. 

I know now what I did not then — that Claudine took full advantage 
of the personality weaknesses the NSA profile had disclosed about 
me. I do not know who supplied her with the information — Einar, the 
NSA, MAIN's personnel department, or someone else — only that 
she used it masterfully. Her approach, a combination of physical 

14 Part 1: 1963-1971 



seduction and verbal manipulation, was tailored specifically for me, 
and yet it fit within the standard operating procedures I have since 
seen used by a variety of businesses when the stakes are high and the 
pressure to close lucrative deals is great. She knew from the start 
that I would not jeopardize my marriage by disclosing our clandes- 
tine activities. And she was brutally frank when it came to describ- 
ing the shadowy side of things that would be expected of me. 

I have no idea who paid her salary, although I have no reason to 
suspect it was not, as her business card implied, MAIN. At the time, 
I was too naive, intimidated, and bedazzled to ask the questions that 
today seem so obvious. 

Claudine told me that there were two primary objectives of my 
work. First, I was to justify huge international loans that would funnel 
money back to MAIN and other U.S. companies (such as Bechtel, 
Halliburton, Stone & Webster, and Brown & Root) through massive 
engineering and construction projects. Second, I would work to 
bankrupt the countries that received those loans (after they had paid 
MAIN and the other U.S. contractors, of course) so that they would 
be forever beholden to their creditors, and so they would present 
easy targets when we needed favors, including military bases, UN 
votes, or access to oil and other natural resources. 

My job, she said, was to forecast the effects of investing billions of 
dollars in a country. Specifically, I would produce studies that pro- 
jected economic growth twenty to twenty-five years into the future 
and that evaluated the impacts of a variety of projects. For example, 
if a decision was made to lend a country $1 billion to persuade its 
leaders not to align with the Soviet Union, I would compare the ben- 
efits of investing that money in power plants with the benefits of in- 
vesting in a new national railroad network or a telecommunications 
system. Or I might be told that the country was being offered the op- 
portunity to receive a modern electric utility system, and it would be 
up to me to demonstrate that such a system would result in sufficient 
economic growth to justify the loan. The critical factor, in every case, 
was gross national product. The project that resulted in the highest 
average annual growth of GNP won. If only one project was under 
consideration, I would need to demonstrate that developing it 
would bring superior benefits to the GNP. 

The unspoken aspect of every one of these projects was that they 
were intended to create large profits for the contractors, and to make 

"In for Life" 15 



a handful of wealthy and influential families in the receiving coun- 
tries very happy, while assuring the long-term financial dependence 
and therefore the political loyalty of governments around the 
world. The larger the loan, the better. The fact that the debt burden 
placed on a country would deprive its poorest citizens of health, ed- 
ucation, and other social services for decades to come was not taken 
into consideration. 

Claudine and I openly discussed the deceptive nature of GNP. For 
instance, the growth of GNP may result even when it profits only one 
person, such as an individual who owns a utility company, and even 
if the majority of the population is burdened with debt. The rich get 
richer and the poor grow poorer. Yet, from a statistical standpoint, 
this is recorded as economic progress. 

Like U.S. citizens in general, most MAIN employees believed we 
were doing countries favors when we built power plants, highways, 
and ports. Our schools and our press have taught us to perceive all of 
our actions as altruistic. Over the years, I've repeatedly heard com- 
ments like, "If they're going to burn the U.S. flag and demonstrate 
against our embassy, why don't we just get out of their damn coun- 
try and let them wallow in their own poverty?" 

People who say such things often hold diplomas certifying that 
they are well educated. However, these people have no clue that the 
main reason we establish embassies around the world is to serve our 
own interests, which during the last half of the twentieth century 
meant turning the American republic into a global empire. Despite 
credentials, such people are as uneducated as those eighteenth- 
century colonists who believed that the Indians fighting to defend 
their lands were servants of the devil. 

Within several months, I would leave for the island of Java in the 
country of Indonesia, described at that time as the most heavily pop- 
ulated piece of real estate on the planet. Indonesia also happened to 
be an oil-rich Muslim nation and a hotbed of communist activity. 

"It's the next domino after Vietnam," is the way Claudine put it. 
"We must win the Indonesians over. If they join the Communist 
bloc, well..." She drew a finger across her throat and then smiled 
sweetly. "Let's just say you need to come up with a very optimistic 
forecast of the economy, how it will mushroom after all the new power 
plants and distribution lines are built. That will allow USAID and 
the international banks to justify the loans. You'll be well rewarded, 

16 Part 1: 1963-1971 



of course, and can move on to other projects in exotic places. The 
world is your shopping cart." She went on to warn me that my role 
would be tough. "Experts at the banks will come after you. It's their 
job to punch holes in your forecasts — that's what they're paid to do. 
Making you look bad makes them look good." 

One day I reminded Claudine that the MAIN team being sent to 
Java included ten other men. I asked if they all were receiving the 
same type of training as me. She assured me they were not. 

"They're engineers," she said. "They design power plants, trans- 
mission and distribution lines, and seaports and roads to bring in 
the fuel. You're the one who predicts the future. Your forecasts de- 
termine the magnitude of the systems they design — and the size of 
the loans. You see, you're the key." 

Every time I walked away from Claudine's apartment, I wondered 
whether I was doing the right thing. Somewhere in my heart, I sus- 
pected I was not. But the frustrations of my past haunted me. MAIN 
seemed to offer everything my life had lacked, and yet I kept asking 
myself if Tom Paine would have approved. In the end, I convinced 
myself that by learning more, by experiencing it, I could better ex- 
pose it later— the old "working from the inside" justification. 

When I shared this idea with Claudine, she gave me a perplexed 
look. "Don't be ridiculous. Once you're in, you can never get out. You 
must decide for yourself, before you get in any deeper." I understood 
her, and what she said frightened me. After I left, I strolled down 
Commonwealth Avenue, turned onto Dartmouth Street, and assured 
myself that I was the exception. 

One afternoon some months later, Claudine and I sat in a win- 
dow settee watching the snow fall on Beacon Street. "We're a small, 
exclusive club," she said. "We're paid — well paid — to cheat countries 
around the globe out of billions of dollars. A large part of your job is 
to encourage world leaders to become part of a vast network that 
promotes U.S. commercial interests. In the end, those leaders be- 
come ensnared in a web of debt that ensures their loyalty. We can 
draw on them whenever we desire — to satisfy our political, economic, 
or military needs. In turn, these leaders bolster their political posi- 
tions by bringing industrial parks, power plants, and airports to 
their people. Meanwhile, the owners of U.S. engineering and con- 
struction companies become very wealthy." 

That afternoon, in the idyllic setting of Claudine's apartment, 

"In for Life" 17 



relaxing in the window while snow swirled around outside, I learned 
the history of the profession I was about to enter. Claudine described 
how throughout most of history, empires were built largely through 
military force or the threat of it. But with the end of World War II, 
the emergence of the Soviet Union, and the specter of nuclear holo- 
caust, the military solution became just too risky. 

The decisive moment occurred in 1951, when Iran rebelled against 
a British oil company that was exploiting Iranian natural resources 
and its people. The company was the forerunner of British Petroleum, 
today's BP. In response, the highly popular, democratically elected 
Iranian prime minister (and TIME magazine's Man of the Year in 
1951), Mohammad Mossadegh, nationalized all Iranian petroleum 
assets. An outraged England sought the help of her World War II 
ally, the United States. However, both countries feared that military 
retaliation would provoke the Soviet Union into taking action on be- 
half of Iran. 

Instead of sending in the Marines, therefore, Washington dis- 
patched CIA agent Kermit Roosevelt (Theodore's grandson). He per- 
formed brilliantly, winning people over through payoffs and threats. 
He then enlisted them to organize a series of street riots and violent 
demonstrations, which created the impression that Mossadegh was 
both unpopular and inept. In the end, Mossadegh went down, and 
he spent the rest of his life under house arrest. The pro-American 
Mohammad Reza Shah became the unchallenged dictator. Kermit 
Roosevelt had set the stage for a new profession, the one whose ranks 
I was joining. 1 

Roosevelt's gambit reshaped Middle Eastern history even as it 
rendered obsolete all the old strategies for empire building. It also 
coincided with the beginning of experiments in "limited nonnuclear 
military actions," which ultimately resulted in US. humiliations in 
Korea and Vietnam. By 1968, the year I interviewed with the NSA, 
it had become clear that if the United States wanted to realize 
its dream of global empire (as envisioned by men like presidents 
Johnson and Nixon), it would have to employ strategies modeled on 
Roosevelt's Iranian example. This was the only way to beat the 
Soviets without the threat of nuclear war. 

There was one problem, however. Kermit Roosevelt was a CIA 
employee. Had he been caught, the consequences would have been 
dire. He had orchestrated the first U.S. operation to overthrow a 



18 Part 1: 1963-1971 



foreign government, and it was likely that many more would follow, 
but it was important to find an approach that would not directly im- 
plicate Washington. 

Fortunately for the strategists, the 1960s also witnessed another 
type of revolution: the empowerment of international corporations 
and of multinational organizations such as the World Bank and the 
IMF. The latter were financed primarily by the United States and 
our sister empire builders in Europe. A symbiotic relationship de- 
veloped between governments, corporations, and multinational or- 
ganizations. 

By the time I enrolled in BU's business school, a solution to the 
Roosevelt-as-CIA-agent problem had already been worked out. U.S. 
intelligence agencies — including the NSA — would identify prospec- 
tive EHMs, who could then be hired by international corporations. 
These EHMs would never be paid by the government; instead, they 
would draw their salaries from the private sector. As a result, their 
dirty work, if exposed, would be chalked up to corporate greed 
rather than to government policy. In addition, the corporations that 
hired them, although paid by government agencies and their multi- 
national banking counterparts (with taxpayer money), would be in- 
sulated from congressional oversight and public scrutiny, shielded 
by a growing body of legal initiatives, including trademark, interna- 
tional trade, and Freedom of Information laws. 2 

"So you see," Claudine concluded, "we are just the next generation 
in a proud tradition that began back when you were in first grade." 



"In for Life" 19 



CHAPTER 3 

Indonesia: Lessons for an EHM 



In addition to learning about my new career, I also spent time read- 
ing books about Indonesia. "The more you know about a country be- 
fore you get there, the easier your job will be ," Claudine had advised. 
I took her words to heart. 

When Columbus set sail in 1492, he was trying to reach Indonesia, 
known at the time as the Spice Islands. Throughout the colonial 
era, it was considered a treasure worth far more than the Americas. 
Java, with its rich fabrics, fabled spices, and opulent kingdoms, was 
both the crown jewel and the scene of violent clashes between Span- 
ish, Dutch, Portuguese, and British adventurers. The Netherlands 
emerged triumphant in 1750, but even though the Dutch controlled 
Java, it took them more than 150 years to subdue the outer islands. 

When the Japanese invaded Indonesia during World War II, 
Dutch forces offered little resistance. As a result, Indonesians, espe- 
cially the Javanese, suffered terribly. Following the Japanese surrender, 
a charismatic leader named Sukarno emerged to declare independ- 
ence. Four years of fighting finally ended on December 27, 1949, 
when the Netherlands lowered its flag and returned sovereignty to a 
people who had known nothing but struggle and domination for 
more than three centuries. Sukarno became the new republic's first 
president. 

Ruling Indonesia, however, proved to be a greater challenge than 
defeating the Dutch. Far from homogeneous, the archipelago of 
about 17,500 islands was a boiling pot of tribalism, divergent cultures, 



20 



dozens of languages and dialects, and ethnic groups who nursed 
centuries-old animosities. Conflicts were frequent and brutal, and 
Sukarno clamped down. He suspended parliament in I960 and was 
named president-for-life in 1963. He formed close alliances with 
Communist governments around the world, in exchange for military 
equipment and training. He sent Russian-armed Indonesian troops 
into neighboring Malaysia in an attempt to spread communism 
throughout Southeast Asia and win the approval of the world's Social- 
ist leaders. 

Opposition built, and a coup was launched in 1965. Sukarno es- 
caped assassination only through the quick wits of his mistress. 
Many of his top military officers and his closest associates were less 
lucky. The events were reminiscent of those in Iran in 1953. In the 
end, the Communist Party was held responsible — especially those 
factions aligned with China. In the Army-initiated massacres that 
followed, an estimated three hundred thousand to five hundred thou- 
sand people were killed. The head of the military, General Suharto, 
took over as president in 1968. 1 

By 1971, the United States' determination to seduce Indonesia 
away from communism was heightened because the outcome of the 
Vietnam War was looking very uncertain. President NLxon had begun 
a series of troop withdrawals in the summer of 1969, and U.S. strat- 
egy was taking on a more global perspective. The strategy focused on 
preventing a domino effect of one country after another falling under 
Communist rule, and it focused on a couple of countries; Indonesia 
was the key. MAIN'S electrification project was part of a compre- 
hensive plan to ensure American dominance in Southeast Asia. 

The premise of U.S. foreign policy was that Suharto would serve 
Washington in a manner similar to the shah of Iran. The United 
States also hoped the nation would serve as a model for other coun- 
tries in the region. Washington based part of its strategy on the 
assumption that gains made in Indonesia might have positive reper- 
cussions throughout the Islamic world, particularly in the explosive 
Middle East. And if that were not incentive enough, Indonesia had 
oil. No one was certain about the magnitude or quality of its reserves, 
but oil company seismologists were exuberant over the possibilities. 

As I pored over the books at the BPL, my excitement grew. I began 
to imagine the adventures ahead. In working for MAIN, I would be 
trading the rugged Peace Corps lifestyle for a much more luxurious 

Indonesia: Lessons for an EHM 21 



and glamorous one. My time with Claudine already represented the 
realization of one of my fantasies; it seemed too good to be true. I felt 
at least partially vindicated for serving the sentence at that all-boys' 
prep school. 

Something else was also happening in my life: Ann and I were 
not getting along. I think she must have sensed that I was leading 
two lives. I justified it as the logical result of the resentment I felt to- 
ward her for forcing us to get married in the first place. Never mind 
that she had nurtured and supported me through the challenges of 
our Peace Corps assignment in Ecuador; I still saw her as a contin- 
uation of my pattern of giving in to my parents' whims. Of course, as 
I look back on it, I'm sure my relationship with Claudine was a ma- 
jor factor. I could not tell Ann about this, but she sensed it. In any 
case, we decided to move into separate apartments. 

One day in 1971, about a week before my scheduled departure for 
Indonesia, I arrived at Claudine's place to find the small dining room 
table set with an assortment of cheeses and breads, and there was a 
fine bottle of Beaujolais. She toasted me. 

"You've made it." She smiled, but somehow it seemed less than 
sincere. "You're now one of us." 

We chatted casually for half an hour or so; then, as we were fin- 
ishing off the wine, she gave me a look unlike any I had seen before. 
"Never admit to anyone about our meetings," she said in a stern 
voice. "I won't forgive you if you do, ever, and I'll deny I ever met 
you." She glared at me — perhaps the only time I felt threatened by 
her — and then gave a cold laugh. "Talking about us would make life 
dangerous for you." 

I was stunned. I felt terrible. But later, as I walked alone back to 
the Prudential Center, I had to admit to the cleverness of the 
scheme. The fact is that all our time together had been spent in her 
apartment. There was not a trace of evidence about our relationship, 
and no one at MAIN was implicated in any way. There was also part 
of me that appreciated her honesty; she had not deceived me the way 
my parents had about Tilton and Middlebury. 



22 Part 1: 1963-1971 



CHAPTER 4 



Saving a Country from Communism 



I had a romanticized vision of Indonesia, the country where I was to 
live for the next three months. Some of the books I read featured 
photographs of beautiful women in brightly colored sarongs, exotic 
Balinese dancers, shamans blowing fire, and warriors paddling long 
dugout canoes in emerald waters at the foot of smoking volcanoes. 
Particularly striking was a series on the magnificent black-sailed 
galleons of the infamous Bugi pirates, who still sailed the seas of the 
archipelago, and who had so terrorized early European sailors that 
they returned home to warn their children, "Behave yourselves, or 
the Bugimen will get you." Oh, how those pictures stirred my soul. 

The history and legends of that country represent a cornucopia of 
larger-than-life figures: wrathful gods, Komodo dragons, tribal sul- 
tans, and ancient tales that long before the birth of Christ had trav- 
eled across Asian mountains, through Persian deserts, and over the 
Mediterranean to embed themselves in the deepest realms of our 
collective psyche. The very names of its fabled islands —Java, Suma- 
tra, Borneo, Sulawesi — seduced the mind. Here was a land of mys- 
ticism, myth, and erotic beauty; an elusive treasure sought but never 
found by Columbus; a princess wooed yet never possessed by Spain, 
by Holland, by Portugal, by Japan; a fantasy and a dream. 

My expectations were high, and I suppose they mirrored those of 
the great explorers. Like Columbus, though, I should have known to 
temper my fantasies. Perhaps I could have guessed that the beacon 
shines on a destiny that is not always the one we envision. Indonesia 



23 



offered treasures, but it was not the chest of panaceas I had come to 
expect. In fact, my first days in Indonesia's steamy capital, Jakarta, in 
the summer of 1971, were shocking. 

The beauty was certainly present. Gorgeous women sporting 
colorful sarongs. Lush gardens ablaze with tropical flowers. Exotic 
Balinese dancers. Bicycle cabs with fanciful, rainbow-colored scenes 
painted on the sides of the high seats, where passengers reclined in 
front of the pedaling drivers. Dutch Colonial mansions and turreted 
mosques. But there was also an ugly, tragic side to the city. Lepers 
holding out bloodied stumps instead of hands. Young girls offering 
their bodies for a few coins. Once-splendid Dutch canals turned into 
cesspools. Cardboard hovels where entire families lived along 
the trash-lined banks of black rivers. Blaring horns and choking 
fumes. The beautiful and the ugly, the elegant and the vulgar, the 
spiritual and the profane. This was Jakarta, where the enticing scent 
of cloves and orchid blossoms battled the miasma of open sewers for 
dominance. 

I had seen poverty before. Some of my New Hampshire class- 
mates lived in cold-water tarpaper shacks and arrived at school 
wearing thin jackets and frayed tennis shoes on subzero winter days, 
their unwashed bodies reeking of old sweat and manure. I had lived 
in mud shacks with Andean peasants whose diet consisted almost 
entirely of dried corn and potatoes, and where it sometimes seemed 
that a newborn was as likely to die as to experience a birthday. I had 
seen poverty, but nothing to prepare me for Jakarta. 

Our team, of course, was quartered in the country's fanciest hotel, 
the Hotel Intercontinental Indonesia. Owned by Pan American Air- 
ways, like the rest of the Intercontinental chain scattered around the 
globe, it catered to the whims of wealthy foreigners, especially oil ex- 
ecutives and their families. On the evening of our first day, our proj- 
ect manager Charlie Illingworth hosted a dinner for us in the elegant 
restaurant on the top floor. 

Charlie was a connoisseur of war; he devoted most of his free 
time to reading history books and historical novels about great military 
leaders and battles. He was the epitome of the pro-Vietnam War 
armchair soldier. As usual, this night he was wearing khaki slacks 
and a short-sleeved khaki shirt with military-style epaulettes. 

After welcoming us, he lit up a cigar. "To the good life," he sighed, 
raising a glass of champagne. 



24 Part 1: 1963-1971 



We joined him. "To the good life." Our glasses clinked. 

Cigar smoke swirling around him, Charlie glanced about the 
room. "We will be well pampered here," he said, nodding his head 
appreciatively. "The Indonesians will take very good care of us. As 
will the U.S. Embassy people. But let's not forget that we have a mis- 
sion to accomplish." He looked down at a handful of note cards. "Yes, 
we're here to develop a master plan for the electrification of Java — 
the most populated land in the world. But that's just the tip of the 
iceberg." 

His expression turned serious; he reminded me of George C. 
Scott playing General Patton, one of Charlie's heroes. "We are here to 
accomplish nothing short of saving this country from the clutches of 
communism. As you know, Indonesia has a long and tragic history. 
Now, at a time w T hen it is poised to launch itself into the twentieth 
century, it is tested once again. Our responsibility is to make sure that 
Indonesia doesn't follow in the footsteps of its northern neighbors, 
Vietnam, Cambodia, and Laos. An integrated electrical system is a 
key element. That, more than any other single factor (with the possi- 
ble exception of oil), will assure that capitalism and democracy rule. 

"Speaking of oil," he said. He took another puff on his cigar and 
flipped past a couple of the note cards. "We all know how dependent 
our own country is on oil. Indonesia can be a powerful ally to us in 
that regard. So, as you develop this master plan, please do everything 
you can to make sure that the oil industry and all the others that 
serve it — ports, pipelines, construction companies — get whatever 
they are likely to need in the way of electricity for the entire duration 
of this twenty- five-year plan." 

He raised his eyes from his note cards and looked directly at me. 
"Better to err on the high side than to underestimate. You don't want 
the blood of Indonesian children — or our own — on your hands. You 
don't want them to live under the hammer and sickle or the Red flag 
of China!" 

As I lay in my bed that night, high above the city, secure in the 
luxury of a first-class suite, an image of Claudine came to me. Her 
discourses on foreign debt haunted me. I tried to comfort myself by 
recalling lessons learned in my macroeconomics courses at business 
school. After all, I told myself, I am here to help Indonesia rise out of 
a medieval economy and take its place in the modern industrial 
world. But I knew that in the morning I would look out my window, 



Saving a Country from Communism 25 



across the opulence of the hotel's gardens and swimming pools, and 
see the hovels that fanned out for miles beyond. I would know that 
babies were dying out there for lack of food and potable water, and 
that infants and adults alike were suffering from horrible diseases 
and living in terrible conditions. 

Tossing and turning in my bed, I found it impossible to deny that 
Charlie and everyone else on our team were here for selfish reasons. 
We were promoting U.S. foreign policy and corporate interests. We 
were driven by greed rather than by any desire to make life better for 
the vast majority of Indonesians. A word came to mind: corporatoc- 
racy. I was not sure whether I had heard it before or had just in- 
vented it, but it seemed to describe perfectly the new elite who had 
made up their minds to attempt to rule the planet. 

This was a close-knit fraternity of a few men with shared goals, 
and the fraternity's members moved easily and often between cor- 
porate boards and government positions. It struck me that the cur- 
rent president of the World Bank, Robert McNamara, was a perfect 
example. He had moved from a position as president of Ford Motor 
Company, to secretary of defense under presidents Kennedy and 
Johnson, and now occupied the top post at the world's most power- 
ful financial institution. 

I also realized that my college professors had not understood the 
true nature of macroeconomics: that in many cases helping an econ- 
omy grow only makes those few people who sit atop the pyramid 
even richer, while it does nothing for those at the bottom except to 
push them even lower. Indeed, promoting capitalism often results in 
a system that resembles medieval feudal societies. If any of my pro- 
fessors knew this, they had not admitted it — probably because big 
corporations, and the men who run them, fund colleges. Exposing 
the truth would undoubtedly cost those professors their jobs— just 
as such revelations could cost me mine. 

These thoughts continued to disturb my sleep every night that I 
spent at the Hotel Intercontinental Indonesia. In the end, my pri- 
mary defense was a highly personal one: I had fought my way out of 
that New Hampshire town, the prep school, and the draft. Through 
a combination of coincidences and hard work, I had earned a place 
in the good life. I also took comfort in the fact that I was doing the 
right thing in the eyes of my culture. I was on my way to becoming 
a successful and respected economist. I was doing what business 

26 Part 1: 1963-1971 



school had prepared me for. I was helping implement a development 
model that was sanctioned by the best minds at the world's top think 
tanks. 

Nonetheless, in the middle of the night I often had to console my- 
self with a promise that someday I would expose the truth. Then I 
would read myself to sleep with Louis L'Amour novels about gun- 
fighters in the Old West. 



Saving a Country from Communism 27 



CHAPTER 5 

Selling My Soul 



Our eleven-man team spent six days in Jakarta registering at the 
U.S. Embassy, meeting various officials, organizing ourselves, and 
relaxing around the pool. The number of Americans who lived at the 
Hotel Intercontinental amazed me. I took great pleasure in watch- 
ing the beautiful young women — wives of U.S. oil and construction 
company executives — who passed their days at the pool and their 
evenings in the half dozen posh restaurants in and around the hotel. 

Then Charlie moved our team to the mountain city of Bandung. 
The climate was milder, the poverty less obvious, and the distrac- 
tions fewer. We were given a government guesthouse known as the 
Wisma, complete with a manager, a cook, a gardener, and a staff of 
servants. Built during the Dutch colonial period, the Wisma was a 
haven. Its spacious veranda faced tea plantations that flowed across 
rolling hills and up the slopes of Java's volcanic mountains. In addi- 
tion to housing, we were provided with eleven Toyota off-road vehi- 
cles, each with a driver and translator. Finally, we were presented 
with memberships to the exclusive Bandung Golf and Racket Club, 
and we were housed in a suite of offices at the local headquarters of 
Perusahaan Umum Listrik Negara (PLN), the government-owned 
electric utility company. 

For me, the first several days in Bandung involved a series of 
meetings with Charlie and Howard Parker. Howard was in his sev- 
enties and was the retired chief load forecaster for the New England 



28 



Electric System. Now he was responsible for forecasting the amount 
of energy and generating capacity (the load) the island of Java would 
need over the next twenty-live years, as well as for breaking this 
down into city and regional forecasts. Since electric demand is highly 
correlated 'with economic growth, his forecasts depended on my eco- 
nomic projections. The rest of our team would develop the master 
plan around these forecasts, locating and designing power plants, 
transmission and distribution lines, and fuel transportation systems 
in a manner that would satisfy our projections as efficiently as pos- 
sible. During our meetings, Charlie continually emphasized the im- 
portance of my job, and he badgered me about the need to be very 
optimistic in my forecasts. Claudine had been right; I was the key to 
the entire master plan. 

"The first few weeks here," Charlie explained, "are about data 
collection." 

He, Howard, and I were seated in big rattan chairs in Charlie's 
plush private office. The walls were decorated with batik tapestries 
depicting epic tales from the ancient Hindu texts of the Ramayana. 
Charlie puffed on a fat cigar. 

"The engineers will put together a detailed picture of the current 
electric system, port capacities, roads, railroads, all those sorts of 
things." He pointed his cigar at me. "You gotta act fast. By the end of 
month one, Howard'll need to get a pretty good idea about the full 
extent of the economic miracles that'll happen when we get the new 
grid online. By the end of the second month, he'll need more details 
— broken down into regions. The last month will be about filling in 
the gaps. That'll be critical. All of us will put our heads together 
then. So, before we leave we gotta be absolutely certain we have all 
the information we'll need. Home for Thanksgiving, that's my motto. 
There's no coming back." 

Howard appeared to be an amiable, grandfatherly type, but he 
was actually a bitter old man who felt cheated by life. He had never 
reached the pinnacle of the New England Electric System and he 
deeply resented it. "Passed over," he told me repeatedly, "because I 
refused to buy the company line." He had been forced into retire- 
ment and then, unable to tolerate staying at home with his wife, had 
accepted a consulting job with MAIN. This was his second assign- 
ment, and I had been warned by both Einar and Charlie to watch 



Selling My Soul 29 



out for him. They described him with words like stubborn, mean, 
and vindictive. 

As it turned out, Howard was one of my wisest teachers, although 
not one I was ready to accept at the time. He had never received the 
type of training Claudine had given me. I suppose they considered 
him too old, or perhaps too stubborn. Or maybe they figured he was 
only in it for the short run, until they could lure in a more pliable 
full-timer like me. In any case, from their standpoint, he turned out 
to be a problem. Howard clearly saw the situation and the role they 
wanted him to play, and he was determined not to be a pawn. All the 
adjectives Einar and Charlie had used to describe him were appro- 
priate, but at least some of his stubbornness grew out of his personal 
commitment not to be their servant. I doubt he had ever heard the 
term economic hit man, but he knew they intended to use him to 
promote a form of imperialism he could not accept. 

He took me aside after one of our meetings with Charlie. He wore 
a hearing aid and riddled with the little box under his shirt that con- 
trolled its volume. 

"This is between you and me," Howard said in a hushed voice. We 
were standing at the window in the office we shared, looking out 
at the stagnant canal that wound past the PLN building. A young 
woman was bathing in its foul waters, attempting to retain some 
semblance of modesty by loosely draping a sarong around her other- 
wise naked body. '"They'll try to convince you that this economy is go- 
ing to skyrocket," he said. "Charlie's ruthless. Don't let him get to you." 

His words gave me a sinking feeling, but also a desire to convince 
him that Charlie was right; after all, my career depended on pleasing 
my MAIN bosses. 

"Surely this economy will boom," I said, my eyes drawn to the 
woman in the canal. "Just look at what's happening." 

"So there you are," he muttered, apparently unaware of the scene 
in front of us. "You've already bought their line, have you?" 

A movement up the canal caught my attention. An elderly man 
had descended the bank, dropped his pants, and squatted at the 
edge of the water to answer natures call. The young woman saw him 
but was undeterred; she continued bathing. I turned away from the 
window and looked directly at Howard. 

"I've been around," I said. "I may be young, but I just got back 



30 Part 1: 1963-1971 



from three years in South America. I've seen what can happen when 
oil is discovered. Things change fast." 

"Oh, I've been around too," he said mockingly. "A great many 
years. I'll tell you something, young man. I don't give a damn for your 
oil discoveries and all that. I forecasted electric loads all my life — 
during the Depression, World War II, times of bust and boom. I've 
seen what Route 128's so-called Massachusetts Miracle did for 
Boston. And I can say for sure that no electric load ever grew by 
more than 7 to 9 percent a year for any sustained period. And that's 
in the best of times. Six percent is more reasonable." 

I stared at him. Part of me suspected he was right, but I felt de- 
fensive. I knew I had to convince him, because my own conscience 
cried out for justification. 

"Howard, this isn't Boston. This is a country where, until now, no 
one could even get electricity. Things are different here." 

He turned on his heel and waved his hand as though he could 
brush me away. 

"Go ahead," he snarled. "Sell out. I don't give a damn what you 
come up with." He jerked his chair from behind his desk and fell into 
it. "I'll make my electricity forecast based on what I believe, not some 
pie-in-the-sky economic study." He picked up his pencil and started 
to scribble on a pad of paper. 

It was a challenge I could not ignore. I went and stood in front of 
his desk. 

"You'll look pretty stupid if I come up with what everyone expects 
— a boom to rival the California gold rush — and you forecast elec- 
tricity growth at a rate comparable to Boston in the 1960s." 

He slammed the pencil down and glared at me. "Unconscionable ! 
That's what it is. You — all of you — " he waved his arms at the offices 
beyond our walls, "you've sold your souls to the devil. You're in it for 
the money. Now," he feigned a smile and reached under his shirt, 
"I'm turning off my hearing aid and going back to work." 

It shook me to the core. I stomped out of the room and headed 
for Charlie's office. Halfway there, I stopped, uncertain about what I 
intended to accomplish. Instead, I turned and walked down the stairs, 
out the door, into the afternoon sunlight. The young woman was 
climbing out of the canal, her sarong wrapped tightly about her 
body. The elderly man had disappeared. Several boys played in the 



Selling My Soul 31 



canal, splashing and shouting at each other. An older woman was 
standing knee-deep in the water, brushing her teeth; another was 
scrubbing clothes. 

A huge lump grew in my throat. I sat down on a slab of broken 
concrete, trying to disregard the pungent odor from the canal. I 
fought hard to hold back the tears; I needed to figure out why I felt 
so miserable. 

You're in it for the money. I heard Howard's words, over and over. 
He had struck a raw nerve. 

The little boys continued to splash each other, their gleeful voices 
filling the air. I wondered what I could do. What would it take to make 
me carefree like them? The question tormented me as I sat there 
watching them cavort in their blissful innocence, apparently un- 
aware of the risk they took by playing in that fetid water. An elderly, 
hunchbacked man with a gnarled cane hobbled along the bank 
above the canal. He stopped and watched the boys, and his face 
broke into a toothless grin. 

Perhaps I could confide in Howard; maybe together we would 
arrive at a solution. I immediately felt a sense of relief. I picked up a 
little stone and threw it into the canal. As the ripples faded, however, 
so did my euphoria. I knew I could do no such thing. Howard was 
old and bitter. He had already passed up opportunities to advance 
his own career. Surely, he would not buckle now. I was young, just 
starting out, and certainly did not want to end up like him. 

Staring into the water of that putrid canal, I once again saw im- 
ages of the New Hampshire prep school on the hill, where I had 
spent vacations alone while the other boys went off to their debu- 
tante balls. Slowly the sorry fact settled in. Once again, there was no 
one I could talk to. 

That night I lay in bed, thinking for a long time about the people 
in my life — Howard, Charlie, Claudine, Ann, Einar, Uncle Frank — 
wondering what my life would be like if I had never met them. 
Where would I be living? Not Indonesia, that was for sure. I wondered 
also about my future, about where I was headed. I pondered the de- 
cision confronting me. Charlie had made it clear that he expected 
Howard and me to come up with growth rates of at least 17 percent 
per annum. What kind of forecast would I produce? 

Suddenly a thought came to me that soothed my soul. Why had it 
not occurred to me before? The decision was not mine at all. Howard 

32 Part I: 1963-1971 



had said that he would do what he considered right, regardless of my 
conclusions. I could please my bosses with a high economic forecast 
and he would make his own decision; my work would have no effect 
on the master plan. People kept emphasizing the importance of my 
role, but they were wrong. A great burden had been lifted. I fell into 
a deep sleep. 

A few days later, Howard was taken ill with a severe amoebic 
attack. We rushed him to a Catholic missionary hospital. The doc- 
tors prescribed medication and strongly recommended that he 
return immediately to the United States. Howard assured us that he 
already had all the data he needed and could easily complete the 
load forecast from Boston. His parting words to me were a reitera- 
tion of his earlier warning. 

"No need to cook the numbers " he said. "I'll not be part of that 
scam, no matter what you say about the miracles of economic 
growth!" 



Selling My Soul 33 



PART II: 1971-1975 



CHAPTER 6 

My Role as Inquisitor 



Our contracts with the Indonesian government, the Asian Develop- 
ment Bank, and USAID required that someone on our team visit all 
the major population centers in the area covered by the master plan. I 
was designated to fulfill this condition. As Charlie put it, 'You survived 
the Amazon; you know how to handle bugs, snakes, and bad water." 

Along with a driver and translator, I visited many beautiful places 
and stayed in some pretty dismal lodgings. I met with local business 
and political leaders and listened to their opinions about the pros- 
pects for economic growth. However, I found most of them reluctant 
to share information with me. They seemed intimidated by my pres- 
ence. Typically, they told me that I would have to check with their 
bosses, with government agencies, or with corporate headquarters in 
Jakarta. I sometimes suspected some sort of conspiracy was directed 
at me. 

These trips were usually short, not more than two or three days. 
In between, I returned to the Wisma in Bandung. The woman who 
managed it had a son a few years younger than me. His name was 
Rasmon, but to everyone except his mother he was Rasy. A student 
of economics at a local university, he immediately took an interest in 
my work. In fact, I suspected that at some point he would approach 
me for a job. He also began to teach me Bahasa Indonesia. 

Creating an easy-to-leam language had been President Sukarno's 
highest priority after Indonesia won its independence from Holland. 



37 



Over 350 languages and dialects are spoken throughout the archi- 
pelago, 1 and Sukarno realized that his country needed a common 
vocabulary in order to unite people from the many islands and cul- 
tures. He recruited an international team of linguists, and Bahasa 
Indonesia was the highly successful result. Based on Malay, it avoids 
many of the tense changes, irregular verbs, and other complications 
that characterize most languages. By the early 1970s, the majority of 
Indonesians spoke it, although they continued to rely on Javanese 
and other local dialects within their own communities. Rasy was a 
great teacher with a wonderful sense of humor, and compared to 
learning Shuar or even Spanish, Bahasa was easy. 

Rasy owned a motor scooter and took it upon himself to intro- 
duce me to his city and people. Til show you a side of Indonesia you 
haven't seen," he promised one evening, and urged me to hop on 
behind him. 

We passed shadow-puppet shows, musicians playing traditional 
instruments, fire-blowers, jugglers, and street vendors selling every 
imaginable ware, from contraband American cassettes to rare indige- 
nous artifacts. Finally, we ended up at a tiny coffeehouse populated 
by young men and women whose clothes, hats, and hairstyles would 
have been right in fashion at a Beatles concert in the late 1960s; 
however, everyone was distinctly Indonesian. Rasy introduced me to 
a group seated around a table and we sat down. 

They all spoke English, with varying degrees of fluency, but they 
appreciated and encouraged my attempts at Bahasa. They talked 
about this openly and asked me why Americans never learned their 
language. I had no answer. Nor could I explain why I was the only 
American or European in this part of the city, even though you could 
always find plenty of us at the Golf and Racket Club, the posh 
restaurants, the movie theaters, and the upscale supermarkets. 

It was a night I shall always remember. Rasy and his friends 
treated me as one of their own. I enjoyed a sense of euphoria from 
being there, sharing their city, food, and music, smelling the clove 
cigarettes and other aromas that were part of their lives, joking and 
laughing with them. It was like the Peace Corps all over again, and 
I found myself wondering why I had thought that I wanted to travel 
first class and separate myself from people like this. As the night 
wore on, they became increasingly interested in learning my thoughts 



:m Part II: 1971-1975 



about their country and about the war my country was righting in 
Vietnam. Every one of them was horrified by what they referred to as 
"the illegal invasion," and they were relieved to discover I shared 
their feelings. 

By the time Rasy and I returned to the guesthouse it was late and 
the place was dark. I thanked him profusely for inviting me into his 
world; he thanked me for opening up to his friends. We promised to 
do it again, hugged, and headed off to our respective rooms. 

That experience with Rasy whetted my appetite for spending more 
time away from the MAIN team. The next morning, I had a meeting 
with Charlie and told him I was becoming frustrated trying to obtain 
information from local people. In addition, most of the statistics I 
needed for developing economic forecasts could only be found at 
government offices in Jakarta. Charlie and I agreed that I would 
need to spend one to two weeks in Jakarta. 

He expressed sympathy for me, having to abandon Bandung for 
the steaming metropolis, and I professed to detest the idea. Secretly, 
however, I was excited by the opportunity to have some time to 
myself, to explore Jakarta and to live at the elegant Hotel Intercon- 
tinental Indonesia. Once in Jakarta, however, I discovered that I 
now viewed life from a different perspective. The night spent with 
Rasy and the young Indonesians, as well as my travels around the 
country, had changed me. I found that I saw my fellow Americans in 
a different light. The young wives seemed not quite so beautiful. The 
chain-link fence around the pool and the steel bars outside the win- 
dows on the lower floors, which I had barely noticed before, now 
took on an ominous appearance. The food in the hotel's elegant 
restaurants seemed insipid. 

I noticed something else too. During my meetings with political 
and business leaders, I became aware of subtleties in the way they 
treated me. I had not perceived it before, but now I saw that many of 
them resented my presence. For example, when they introduced me 
to each other, they often used Bahasa terms that according to my 
dictionary translated to inquisitor and interrogator. I purposely neg- 
lected disclosing my knowledge of their language — even my trans- 
lator knew only that I could recite a few stock phrases — and I 
purchased a good Bahasa/English dictionary, which I often used 
after leaving them. 



My Role as Inquisitor 39 



Were these addresses just coincidences of language? Misinter- 
pretations in my dictionary? I tried to convince myself they were. 
Yet, the more time I spent with these men, the more convinced I be- 
came that I was an intruder, that an order to cooperate had come 
down from someone, and that they had little choice but to comply. I 
had no idea whether a government official, a banker, a general, or 
the U.S. Embassy had sent the order. All I knew was that although 
they invited me into their offices, offered me tea, politely answered 
my questions, and in every overt manner seemed to welcome my 
presence, beneath the surface there was a shadow of resignation and 
rancor. 

It made me wonder, too, about their answers to my questions and 
about the validity of their data. For instance, I could never just walk 
into an office with my translator and meet with someone; we first 
had to set up an appointment. In itself, this would not have seemed 
so strange, except that doing so was outrageously time consuming. 
Since the phones seldom worked, we had to drive through the traf- 
fic-choked streets, which were laid out in such a contorted manner 
that it could take an hour to reach a building only blocks away. Once 
there, we were asked to fill out several forms. Eventually, a male sec- 
retary would appear. Politely — always with the courteous smile for 
which the Javanese are famous — he would question me about the 
types of information I desired, and then he would establish a time 
for the meeting. 

Without exception, the scheduled appointment was at least sev- 
eral days away, and when the meeting finally occurred I was handed 
a folder of prepared materials. The industry owners gave me five- 
and ten-year plans, the bankers had charts and graphs, and the gov- 
ernment officials provided lists of projects that were in the process of 
leaving the drawing boards to become engines of economic growth. 
Everything these captains of commerce and government provided, 
and all they said during the interviews, indicated that Java was 
poised for perhaps the biggest boom any economy had ever enjoyed. 
No one — not a single person — ever questioned this premise or gave 
me any negative information. 

As I headed back to Bandung, though, I found myself wondering 
about all these experiences; something was deeply disturbing. It oc- 
curred to me that everything I was doing in Indonesia was more like 



40 Part II: 1971-1975 



a game than reality. It was as though we were playing a game of poker. 
We kept our cards hidden. We could not trust each other or count on 
the reliability of the information we shared. Yet, this game was 
deadly serious, and its outcome would impact millions of lives for 
decades to come. 



My Role as Inquisitor 41 



CHAPTER 7 

Civilization on Trial 



'Tm taking you to a dalang," Rasy beamed. "You know, the famous 
Indonesian puppet masters." He was obviously pleased to have me 
back in Bandung. "There's a very important one in town tonight." 

He drove me on his scooter through parts of his city I did not 
know existed, through sections filled with traditional Javanese 
kampong houses, which looked like a poor person's version of tiny 
tile-roofed temples. Gone were the stately Dutch Colonial mansions 
and office buildings I had grown to expect. The people were obvi- 
ously poor, yet they bore themselves with great pride. They wore 
threadbare but clean batik sarongs, brightly colored blouses, and 
wide-brimmed straw hats. Everywhere we went we were greeted 
with smiles and laughter. When we stopped, children rushed up to 
touch me and feel the fabric of my jeans. One little girl stuck a fra- 
grant frangipani blossom in my hair. 

We parked the scooter near a sidewalk theater where several hun- 
dred people were gathered, some standing, others sitting in portable 
chairs. The night was clear and beautiful. Although we were in the 
heart of the oldest section of Bandung, there were no streetlights, so 
the stars sparkled over our heads. The air was filled with the aromas 
of wood fires, peanuts, and cloves. 

Rasy disappeared into the crowd and soon returned with many of 
the young people I had met at the coffeehouse. They offered me hot 
tea, little cakes, and sate, tiny bits of meat cooked in peanut oil. I 
must have hesitated before accepting the latter, because one of the 



42 



women pointed at a small fire. "Very fresh meat " she laughed. "Just 
cooked." 

Then the music started — the haunt ingly magical sounds of the 
gamalong, an instrument that conjures images of temple bells. 

"The dalang plays all the music by himself," Rasy whispered. "He 
also works all the puppets and speaks their voices, several languages. 
We'll translate for you." 

It was a remarkable performance, combining traditional legends 
with current events. I would later learn that the dalang is a shaman 
who does his work in trance. He had over a hundred puppets and he 
spoke for each in a different voice. It was a night I will never forget, 
and one that has influenced the rest of my life. 

After completing a classic selection from the ancient texts of the 
Ramayana, the dalang produced a puppet of Richard Nixon, complete 
with the distinctive long nose and sagging jowls. The U.S. president 
was dressed like Uncle Sam, in a stars-and-stripes top hat and tails. 
He was accompanied by another puppet, which wore a three-piece 
pin-striped suit. The second puppet carried in one hand a bucket 
decorated with dollar signs. He used his free hand to wave an Ameri- 
can flag over Nixon's head in the manner of a slave fanning a master. 

A map of the Middle and Far East appeared behind the two, the 
various countries hanging from hooks in their respective positions. 
Nixon immediately approached the map, lifted Vietnam off its hook, 
and thrust it to his mouth. He shouted something that was trans- 
lated as, "Bitter! Rubbish. We don't need any more of this!" Then he 
tossed it into the bucket and proceeded to do the same with other 
countries. 

I was surprised, however, to see that his next selections did not 
include the domino nations of Southeast Asia. Rather, they were all 
Middle Eastern countries — Palestine, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, Iraq, 
Syria, and Iran. After that, he turned to Pakistan and Afghanistan. 
Each time, the Nixon doll screamed out some epithet before drop- 
ping the country into his bucket, and in every instance, his vitupera- 
tive words were anti-Islamic: "Muslim dogs," "Mohammed's monsters," 
and "Islamic devils." 

The crowd became very excited, the tension mounting with each 
new addition to the bucket. They seemed torn between fits of laughter, 
shock, and rage. At times, I sensed they took offense at the puppeteer's 
language. I also felt intimidated; I stood out in this crowd, taller 

Civilization on Trial 43 



than the rest, and I worried that they might direct their anger at me. 
Then Nixon said something that made my scalp tingle when Rasy 
translated it. 

"Give this one to the World Bank. See what it can do to make us 
some money off Indonesia." He lifted Indonesia from the map and 
moved to drop it into the bucket, but just at that moment another 
puppet leaped out of the shadows. This puppet represented an In- 
donesian man, dressed in batik shirt and khaki slacks, and he wore 
a sign with his name clearly printed on it. 

"A popular Bandung politician," Rasy explained. 

This puppet literally flew between Nixon and Bucket Man and 
held up his hand. 

"Stop!" he shouted. "Indonesia is sovereign." 

The crowd burst into applause. Then Bucket Man lifted his flag 
and thrust it like a spear into the Indonesian, who staggered and 
died a most dramatic death. The audience members booed, hooted, 
screamed, and shook their fists. Nixon and Bucket Man stood there, 
looking out at us. They bowed and left the stage. 

"I think I should go," I said to Rasy. 

He placed a hand protectively around my shoulder. "It's okay," he 
said. "They have nothing against you personally." I wasn't so sure. 

Later we all retired to the coffeehouse. Rasy and the others as- 
sured me that they had not been informed ahead of time about the 
Nixon-World Bank skit. "You never know what to expect from that 
puppeteer," one of the young men observed. 

I wondered aloud whether this had been staged in my honor. 
Someone laughed and said I had a very big ego. "Typical of Ameri- 
cans," he added, patting my back congenially. 

"Indonesians are very conscious of politics," the man in the chair 
beside me said. "Don't Americans go to shows like this?" 

A beautiful woman, an English major at the university, sat across 
the table from me. "But you do work for the World Bank, don't you?" 
she asked. 

I told her that my current assignment was for the Asian Devel- 
opment Bank and the United States Agency for Internationa] 
Development. 

"Aren't they really all the same?" She didn't wait for an answer. 
"Isn't it like the play tonight showed? Doesn't your government look 



44 Part li: 1971-1975 



at Indonesia and other countries as though we are just a bunch of..." 
She searched for the word. 

"Grapes," one of her friends coached. 

"Exactly. A bunch of grapes. You can pick and choose. Keep Eng- 
land. Eat China. And throw away Indonesia." 

"After you've taken all our oil," another woman added. 

I tried to defend myself but was not at all up to the task. I wanted 
to take pride in the fact that I had come to this part of town and had 
stayed to watch the entire anti-U.S. performance, which I might 
have construed as a personal assault. I wanted them to see the 
courage of what I had done, to know that I was the only member of 
my team who bothered to learn Bahasa or had any desire to take in 
their culture, and to point out that I was the sole foreigner attending 
this production. But I decided it would be more prudent not to men- 
tion any of this. Instead, I tried to refocus the conversation. I asked 
them why they thought the dalang had singled out Muslim coun- 
tries, except for Vietnam. 

The beautiful English major laughed at this. "Because that's the 
plan." 

"Vietnam is just a holding action," one of the men interjected, 
"like Holland was for the Nazis. A stepping-stone." 

"The real target," the woman continued, "is the Muslim world." 

I could not let this go unanswered. "Surely," I protested, "you can't 
believe that the United States is anti-Islamic." 

"Oh no?" she asked. "Since when? You need to read one of your 
own historians — a Brit named Toynbee. Back in the fifties he pre- 
dicted that the real war in the next century would not be between 
Communists and capitalists, but between Christians and Muslims." 

"Arnold Toynbee said that?" I was stunned. 

"Yes. Read Civilization on Trial and The World and the West" 

"But why should there be such animosity between Muslims and 
Christians?" I asked. 

Looks were exchanged around the table. They appeared to find it 
hard to believe that I could ask such a foolish question. 

"Because," she said slowly, as though addressing someone slow- 
witted or hard of hearing, "the West — especially its leader, the U.S. 
— is determined to take control of all the world, to become the great- 
est empire in history. It has already gotten very close to succeeding. 



Civilization on Trial 45 



The Soviet Union currently stands in its way, but the Soviets will not 
endure. Toynbee could see that. They have no religion, no faith, no 
substance behind their ideology. History demonstrates that faith — 
soul, a belief in higher powers — is essential. We Muslims have it. We 
have it more than anyone else in the world, even more than the 
Christians. So we wait. We grow strong." 

"We will take our time," one of the men chimed in, "and then like 
a snake we will strike." 

"What a horrible thought!" I could barely contain myself. "What 
can we do to change this?" 

The English major looked me directly in the eyes. "Stop being so 
greedy," she said, "and so selfish. Realize that there is more to the 
world than your big houses and fancy stores. People are starving and 
you worry about oil for your cars. Babies are dying of thirst and you 
search the fashion magazines for the latest styles. Nations like ours 
are drowning in poverty, but your people don't even hear our cries 
for help. You shut your ears to the voices of those who try to tell you 
these things. You label them radicals or Communists. You must open 
your hearts to the poor and downtrodden, instead of driving them 
further into poverty and servitude. There's not much time left. If you 
don't change, you're doomed." 

Several days later the popular Bandung politician, whose puppet 
stood up to Nixon and was impaled by Bucket Man, was struck and 
killed by a hit-and-run driver. 



46 Part II: 1971-1975 



CHAPTER 8 

Jesus, Seen Differently 



The memory of that dalang stuck with me. So did the words of the 
beautiful English major. That night in Bandung catapulted me to a 
new level of thinking and feeling. While I had not exactly ignored 
the implications of what we were doing in Indonesia, my reactions 
had been ruled by emotions, and I usually had been able to calm my 
feelings by calling on reason, on the example of history, and on the 
biological imperative. I had justified our involvement as part of the 
human condition, convincing myself that Einar, Charlie, and the rest 
of us were simply acting as men always have: taking care of ourselves 
and our families. 

My discussion with those young Indonesians, however, forced me 
to see another aspect of the issue. Through their eyes, I realized that 
a selfish approach to foreign policy does not serve or protect future 
generations anywhere. It is myopic, like the annual reports of the 
corporations and the election strategies of the politicians who for- 
mulate that foreign policy. 

As it turned out, the data I needed for my economic forecasts 
required frequent visits to Jakarta. I took advantage of my time 
alone there to ponder these matters and to write about them in a 
journal. I wandered the streets of that city, handed money to beggars, 
and attempted to engage lepers, prostitutes, and street urchins in 
conversation. 

Meanwhile, I pondered the nature of foreign aid, and I consid- 
ered the legitimate role that developed countries (DCs, in World 



47 



Bank jargon) might play in helping alleviate poverty and misery in 
less-developed countries (LDCs). I began to wonder when foreign 
aid is genuine and when it is only greedy and self-serving. Indeed, I 
began to question whether such aid is ever altruistic, and if not, 
whether that could be changed. I was certain that countries like my 
own should take decisive action to help the sick and starving of the 
world, but I was equally certain that this was seldom — if ever — 
the prime motivation for our intervention. 

I kept coming back to one main question: if the objective of for- 
eign aid is imperialism, is that so wrong? I often found myself envy- 
ing people like Charlie who believed so strongly in our system that 
they wanted to force it on the rest of the world. I doubted whether 
limited resources would allow the whole world to live the opulent 
life of the United States, when even the United States had millions of 
citizens living in poverty. In addition, it wasn't entirely clear to me that 
people in other nations actually want to live like us. Our own statis- 
tics about violence, depression, drug abuse, divorce, and crime in- 
dicated that although ours was one of the wealthiest societies in 
history, it may also be one of the least happy societies. Why would we 
want others to emulate us? 

Perhaps Claudine had warned me of all this. I was no longer sure 
what it was she had been trying to tell me. In any case, intellectual 
arguments aside, it had now become painfully clear that my days of 
innocence were gone. I wrote in my journal: 

Is anyone in the U.S. innocent? Although those at the 
very pinnacle of the economic pyramid gain the most, 
millions of us depend — either directly or indirectly — on 
the exploitation of the LDCs for our livelihoods. The 
resources and cheap labor that feed nearly all our busi- 
nesses come from places like Indonesia, and very little 
ever makes its way back. The loans of foreign aid ensure 
that today's children and their grandchildren will be held 
hostage. They will have to allow our corporations to ravage 
their natural resources and will have to forego education, 
health, and other social services merely to pay us back. 
The fact that our own companies already received most 
of this money to build the power plants, airports, and 



48 Part II: 1971-1975 



industrial parks does not factor into this formula. Does the 
excuse that most Americans are unaware of this constitute 
innocence? Uninformed and intentionally misinformed, 
yes — but innocent? 

Of course, I had to face the fact that I was now numbered among 
those who actively misinform. 

The concept of a worldwide holy war was a disturbing one, but 
the longer I contemplated it, the more convinced I became of its pos- 
sibility. It seemed to me, however, that if this jihad were to occur it 
would be less about Muslims versus Christians than it would be 
about LDCs versus DCs, perhaps with Muslims at the forefront. We 
in the DCs were the users of resources; those in the LDCs were the 
suppliers. It was the colonial mercantile system all over again, set up 
to make it easy for those with power and limited natural resources to 
exploit those with resources but no power. 

I did not have a copy of Toynbee with me, but I knew enough his- 
tory to understand that suppliers who are exploited long enough will 
rebel. I only had to return to the American Revolution and Tom 
Paine for a model. I recalled that Britain justified its taxes by claim- 
ing that England was providing aid to the colonies in the form of 
military protection against the French and the Indians. The colonists 
had a very different interpretation. 

What Paine offered to his countrymen in the brilliant Common 
Sense was the soul that my young Indonesian friends had referred to 
— an idea, a faith in the justice of a higher power, and a religion of 
freedom and equality that was diametrically opposed to the British 
monarchy and its elitist class systems. What Muslims offered was 
similar: faith in a higher power and a belief that developed countries 
have no right to subjugate and exploit the rest of the world. Like 
colonial minutemen, Muslims were threatening to fight for their 
rights, and like the British in the 1770s, we classified such actions as 
terrorism. History appeared to be repeating itself. 

I wondered what sort of a world we might have if the United 
States and its allies diverted all the monies expended in colonial 
wars — like the one in Vietnam — to eradicating world hunger or to 
making education and basic health care available to all people, 
including our own. I wondered how future generations would be 



Jesus, Seen Differently 49 



affected if we committed to alleviating the sources of misery and to 
protecting watersheds, forests, and other natural areas that ensure 
clean water, air, and the things that feed our spirits as well as our 
bodies. I could not believe that our Founding Fathers had envisioned 
the right to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness to exist only for 
Americans, so why were we now implementing strategies that pro- 
moted the imperialist values they had fought against? 

On my last night in Indonesia, I awoke from a dream, sat up in 
bed, and switched on the light. I had the feeling that someone" was 
in the room with me. I peered around at the familiar Hotel Inter- 
Continental furniture, the batik tapestries, and the framed shadow 
puppets hanging on the walls. Then the dream came back. 

I had seen Christ standing in front of me. He seemed like the 
same Jesus I had talked with every night when, as a young boy, I 
shared my thoughts with him after saying my formal prayers. Except 
that the Jesus of my childhood was fair-skinned and blond, while 
this one had curly black hair and a dark complexion. He bent down 
and heaved something up to his shoulder. I expected a cross. In- 
stead, I saw the axle of a car with the attached wheel rim protruding 
above his head, forming a metallic halo. Grease dripped like blood 
down his forehead. He straightened, peered into my eyes, and said, 
"If I were to come now, you would see me differently." I asked him 
why. "Because," he answered, "the world has changed." 

The clock told me it was nearly daylight. I knew I could not go 
back to sleep, so I dressed, took the elevator to the empty lobby, and 
wandered into the gardens around the swimming pool. The moon 
was bright; the sweet smell of orchids filled the air. I sat down in a 
lounge chair and wondered what I was doing here, why the coinci- 
dences of my life had taken me along this path, why Indonesia. I 
knew my life had changed, but I had no idea how drastically. 



Ann and I met in Paris on my way home, to attempt reconciliation. 
Even during this French vacation, however, we continued to quarrel. 
Although there were many special and beautiful moments, I think 
we both came to the realization that our long history of anger and 



50 Part II: 1971-1975 



resentment was too large an obstacle. Besides, there was so much I 
could not tell her. The only person I could share such things with 
was Claudine, and I thought about her constantly. Ann and I landed 
at Bostons Logan Airport and took a taxi to our separate apartments 
in the Back Bay. 



Jesus, Seen Differently 51 



CHAPTER 9 

Opportunity of a Lifetime 



The true test of Indonesia awaited me at MAIN. I went to the Pru- 
dential Center headquarters first thing in the morning, and while I 
was standing with dozens of other employees at the elevator I learned 
that Mac Hall, MAIN's enigmatic, octogenarian chairman and CEO, 
had promoted Einar to president of the Portland, Oregon office. As 
a result, I now officially reported to Bruno Zambotti. 

Nicknamed "the silver fox" because of the color of his hair and 
his uncanny ability to outmaneuver everyone who challenged him, 
Bruno had the dapper good looks of Gary Grant. He was eloquent, 
and he held both an engineering degree and an MBA. He under- 
stood econometrics and was vice president in charge of MAIN's elec- 
trical power division and of most of our international projects. He 
also was the obvious choice to take over as president of the corpora- 
tion when his mentor, the aging Jake Dauber, retired. Like most 
MAIN employees, I was awed and terrified by Bruno Zambotti. 

Just before lunch, I was summoned to Bruno's office. Following a 
cordial discussion about Indonesia, he said something that made me 
jump to the edge of my seat. 

"I'm firing Howard Parker. We don't need to go into the details, 
except to say that he's lost touch with reality." His smile was discon- 
certingly pleasant as he tapped his finger against a sheaf of papers 
on his desk. "Eight percent a year. That's his load forecast. Can you 
believe it? In a country with the potential of Indonesia!" 

His smile faded and he looked me squarely in the eye. "Charlie 



52 



Illingworth tells me that your economic forecast is right on target 
and will justify load growth of between 17 and 20 percent. Is that 
right?" 

I assured him it was. 

He stood up and offered me his hand. "Congratulations. You've 
just been promoted." 

Perhaps I should have gone out and celebrated at a fancy restau- 
rant with other MAIN employees — or even by myself. However, my 
mind was on Claudine. I was dying to tell her about my promotion 
and all my experiences in Indonesia. She had warned me not to call 
her from abroad, and I had not. Now I was dismayed to find that her 
phone was disconnected, with no forwarding number. I went look- 
ing for her. 

A young couple had moved into her apartment. It was lunchtime 
but I believe I roused them from their bed; obviously annoyed, they 
professed to know nothing about Claudine. I paid a visit to the real 
estate agency, pretending to be a cousin. Their files indicated they had 
never rented to anyone with her name; the previous lease had been 
issued to a man who would remain anonymous by his request. Back 
at the Prudential Center, MAIN's employment office also claimed to 
have no record of her. They admitted only to a "special consultants" 
file that was not available for my scrutiny. 

By late afternoon, I was exhausted and emotionally drained. On 
top of everything else, a bad case of jet lag had set in. Returning to 
my empty apartment, I felt desperately lonely and abandoned. My 
promotion seemed meaningless or, even worse, to be a badge of my 
willingness to sell out. I threw myself onto the bed, overwhelmed 
with despair. I had been used by Claudine and then discarded. De- 
termined not to give in to my anguish, I shut down my emotions. I lay 
there on my bed staring at the bare walls for what seemed like hours. 

Finally, I managed to pull myself together. I got up, swallowed a 
beer, and smashed the empty bottle against a table. Then I stared 
out the window. Looking down a distant street, I thought I saw her 
walking toward me. I started for the door and then returned to 
the window for another look. The woman had come closer. I could 
see that she was attractive, and that her walk was reminiscent of 
Claudine's, but it was not Claudine. My heart sank, and my feelings 
changed from anger and loathing to fear. 

An image flashed before me of Claudine flailing, falling in a rain 

Opportunity of a Lifetime 53 



of bullets, assassinated. I shook it off, took a couple Valium, and 
drank myself to sleep. 

The next morning, a call from MAIN's personnel department woke 
me from my stupor. Its chief, Paul Mormino, assured me he under- 
stood my need for rest, but he urged me to come in that afternoon. 

"Good news," he said. "The best thing for catching up with yourself." 

I obeyed the summons and learned that Bruno had been more 
than true to his word. I had not only been promoted to Howard's old 
job; I had been given the title of Chief Economist and a raise. It did 
cheer me up a bit. 

I took the afternoon off and wandered down along the Charles 
River with a quart of beer. As I sat there, watching the sailboats and 
nursing combined jet lag and vicious hangover, I convinced myself 
that Claudine had done her job and had moved on to her next 
assignment. She had always emphasized the need for secrecy. She 
would call me. Mormino had been right. My jet lag — and my anxi- 
ety — dissipated. 

During the next weeks, I tried to put all thoughts of Claudine 
aside. I focused on writing my report on the Indonesian economy 
and on revising Howard's load forecasts. I came up with the type of 
study my bosses wanted to see: a growth in electric demand averag- 
ing 19 percent per annum for twelve years after the new system was 
completed, tapering down to 17 percent for eight more years, and 
then holding at 15 percent for the remainder of the twenty-five-year 
projection. 

I presented my conclusions at formal meetings with the interna- 
tional lending agencies. Their teams of experts questioned me ex- 
tensively and mercilessly. By then, my emotions had turned into a 
sort of grim determination, not unlike those that had driven me to 
excel rather than to rebel during my prep school days. Nonetheless, 
Claudine's memory always hovered close. When a sassy young 
economist out to make a name for himself at the Asian Development 
Bank grilled me relentlessly for an entire afternoon, I recalled the 
advice Claudine had given me as we sat in her Beacon Street apart- 
ment those many months before. 

"Who can see twenty-five years into the future?" she had asked. 
"Your guess is as good as theirs. Confidence is everything." 

I convinced myself I was an expert, reminding myself that I had 
experienced more of life in developing countries than many of the 

54 Part II: 1971-1975 



men — some of them twice my age —who now sat in judgment of my 
work. I had lived in the Amazon and had traveled to parts of Java no 
one else wanted to visit. I had taken a couple of intensive courses 
aimed at teaching executives the finer points of econometrics, and 
I told myself that I was part of the new breed of statistically ori- 
ented, econometric-worshipping whiz kids that appealed to Robert 
McNamara, the buttoned-down president of the World Bank, former 
president of Ford Motor Company, and John Kennedy's secretary of 
defense. Here was a man who had built his reputation on numbers, 
on probability theory, on mathematical models, and — I suspected — 
on the bravado of a very large ego. 

I tried to emulate both McNamara and my boss, Bruno. I adopted 
manners of speech that imitated the former, and I took to walking 
with the swagger of the latter, attache case swinging at my side. 
Looking back, I have to wonder at my gall. In truth, my expertise 
was extremely limited, but what I lacked in training and knowledge 
I made up for in audacity. 

And it worked. Eventually the team of experts stamped my re- 
ports with their seals of approval. 

During the ensuing months, I attended meetings in Tehran, 
Caracas, Guatemala City, London, Vienna, and Washington, DC. I 
met famous personalities, including the shah of Iran, the former 
presidents of several countries, and Robert McNamara himself. Like 
prep school, it was a world of men. I was amazed at how my new ti- 
tle and the accounts of my recent successes before the international 
lending agencies affected other people's attitudes toward me. 

At first, all the attention went to my head. I began to think of my- 
self as a Merlin who could wave his wand over a country, causing it 
suddenly to light up, industries sprouting like flowers. Then I became 
disillusioned. I questioned my own motives and those of all the people 
I worked with. It seemed that a glorified title or a PhD did little to 
help a person understand the plight of a leper living beside a cess- 
pool in Jakarta, and I doubted that a knack for manipulating statistics 
enabled a person to see into the future. The better I came to know 
those who made the decisions that shape the world, the more skep- 
tical I became about their abilities and their goals. Looking at the 
faces around the meeting room tables, I found myself struggling very 
hard to restrain my anger. 

Eventually, however, this perspective also changed. I came to 



Opportunity of a Lifetime 55 



understand that most of those men believed they were doing the 
right thing. Like Charlie, they were convinced that communism and 
terrorism were evil forces — rather than the predictable reactions to 
decisions they and their predecessors had made — and that they had 
a duty to their country, to their offspring, and to God to convert the 
world to capitalism. They also clung to the principle of survival of 
the fittest; if they happened to enjoy the good fortune to have been 
born into a privileged class instead of inside a cardboard shack, then 
they saw it as an obligation to pass this heritage on to their progeny. 

I vacillated between viewing such people as an actual conspiracy 
and simply seeing them as a tight-knit fraternity bent on dominating 
the world. Nonetheless, over time I began to liken them to the plan- 
tation owners of the pre-Civil War South. They were men drawn 
together in a loose association by common beliefs and shared self- 
interest, rather than an exclusive group meeting in clandestine 
hideaways with focused and sinister intent. The plantation autocrats 
had grown up with servants and slaves, had been educated to believe 
that it was their right and even their duty to take care of the "hea- 
thens" and to convert them to the owners' religion and way of life. 
Even if slavery repulsed them philosophically, they could, like 
Thomas Jefferson, justify it as a necessity, the collapse of which 
would result in social and economic chaos. The leaders of the modern 
oligarchies, what I now thought of as the corporatocracy, seemed to 
fit the same mold. 

I also began to wonder who benefits from war and the mass pro- 
duction of weapons, from the damming of rivers and the destruction 
of indigenous environments and cultures. I began to look at who 
benefits when hundreds of thousands of people die from insufficient 
food, polluted water, or curable diseases. Slowly, I came to realize 
that in the long run no one benefits, but in the short term those at 
the top of the pyramid — my bosses and me — appear to benefit, at 
least materially. 

This raised several other questions: Why does this situation persist? 
Why has it endured for so long? Does the answer lie simply in the 
old adage that "might is right," that those with the power perpetuate 
the system? 

It seemed insufficient to say that power alone allows this situation 
to persist. While the proposition that might makes right explained a 
great deal, I felt there must be a more compelling force at work here. 

56 Part II: 1971-1975 



I recalled an economics professor from my business school days, a man 
from northern India, who lectured about limited resources, about 
man's need to grow continually, and about the principle of slave labor. 
According to this professor, all successful capitalist systems involve 
hierarchies with rigid chains of command, including a handful at the 
very top who control descending orders of subordinates, and a mas- 
sive army of workers at the bottom, who in relative economic terms 
truly can be classified as slaves. Ultimately, then, I became convinced 
that we encourage this system because the corporatocracy has con- 
vinced us that God has given us the right to place a few of our peo- 
ple at the very top of this capitalist pyramid and to export our system 
to the entire world. 

Of course, we are not the first to do this. The list of practitioners 
stretches back to the ancient empires of North Africa, the Middle 
East, and Asia, and works its way up through Persia, Greece, Rome, 
the Christian Crusades, and all the European empire builders of the 
post-Columbian era. This imperialist drive has been and continues 
to be the cause of most wars, pollution, starvation, species extinc- 
tions, and genocides. And it has always taken a serious toll on the 
conscience and well-being of the citizens of those empires, contribut- 
ing to social malaise and resulting in a situation where the wealthiest 
cultures in human history are plagued with the highest rates of suicide, 
drug abuse, and violence. 

I thought extensively on these questions, but I avoided consider- 
ing the nature of my own role in all of this. I tried to think of myself 
not as an EHM but as a chief economist. It sounded so very legiti- 
mate, and if I needed any confirmation, I could look at my pay stubs: 
all were from MAIN, a private corporation. I didn't earn a penny 
from the NSA or any government agency. And so I became con- 
vinced. Almost. 

One afternoon Bruno called me into his office. He walked behind 
my chair and patted me on the shoulder. "You've done an excellent 
job," he purred. "To show our appreciation, we're giving you the op- 
portunity of a lifetime, something few men ever receive, even at 
twice your age." 



Opportunity of a Lifetime 57 



CHAPTER 10 

Panama's President and Hero 



I landed at Panama's Tocumen International Airport late one April 
night in 1972, during a tropical deluge. As was common in those 
days, I shared a taxi with several other executives, and because I 
spoke Spanish, I ended up in the front seat beside the driver. I stared 
blankly out the taxi's windshield. Through the rain, the headlights 
illuminated a billboard portrait of a handsome man with a promi- 
nent brow and flashing eyes. One side of his wide-brimmed hat was 
hooked rakishly up. I recognized him as the hero of modern Panama, 
Omar Torrijos. 

I had prepared for this trip in my customary fashion, by visiting 
the reference section of the Boston Public Library. I knew that one of 
the reasons for Torrijos 's popularity among his people was that he 
was a firm defender of both Panama's right of self-rule and of its 
claims to sovereignty over the Panama Canal. He was determined 
that the country under his leadership would avoid the pitfalls of its 
ignominious history. 

Panama was part of Colombia when the French engineer Ferdinand 
de Lesseps, who directed construction of the Suez Canal, decided to 
build a canal through the Central American isthmus, to connect the 
Atlantic and Pacific oceans. Beginning in 1881, the French under- 
took a mammoth effort that met with one catastrophe after another. 
Finally, in 1889, the project ended in financial disaster —but it had 
inspired a dream in Theodore Roosevelt. During the first years of the 
twentieth century, the United States demanded that Colombia sign 



58 



a treaty turning the isthmus over to a North American consortium. 
Colombia refused. 

In 1903, President Roosevelt sent in the U.S. warship Nashville. 
U.S. soldiers landed, seized and killed a popular local militia com- 
mander, and declared Panama an independent nation. A puppet 
government was installed and the first Canal Treaty was signed; it 
established an American zone on both sides of the future waterway, 
legalized U.S. military intervention, and gave Washington virtual 
control over this newly formed "independent" nation. 

Interestingly, the treaty was signed by U.S. Secretary of State Hay 
and a French engineer, Philippe Bunau-Varilla, who had been part of 
the original team, but it was not signed by a single Panamanian. In 
essence, Panama was forced to leave Colombia in order to serve the 
United States, in a deal struck by an American and a Frenchman — 
in retrospect, a prophetic beginning. 1 

For more than half a century, Panama was ruled by an oligarchy 
of wealthy families with strong connections to Washington. They 
were right-wing dictators who took whatever measures they deemed 
necessary to ensure that their country promoted U.S. interests. In 
the manner of most of the Latin American dictators who allied them- 
selves with Washington, Panama's rulers interpreted U.S. interests to 
mean putting down any populist movement that smacked of social- 
ism. They also supported the CIA and NSA in anti-Communist ac- 
tivities throughout the hemisphere, and they helped big American 
businesses like Rockefeller's Standard Oil and United Fruit Company 
(which was purchased by George H. W. Bush). These governments 
apparently did not feel that U.S. interests were promoted by im- 
proving the lives of people who lived in dire poverty or served as 
virtual slaves to the big plantations and corporations. 

Panama's ruling families were well rewarded for their support; 
U.S. military forces intervened on their behalf a dozen times between 
the declaration of Panamanian independence and 1968. However, 
that year, while I was still a Peace Corps volunteer in Ecuador, the 
course of Panamanian history suddenly changed. A coup overthrew 
Arnulfo Arias, the latest in the parade of dictators, and Omar Torrijos 
emerged as the head of state, although he had not actively partici- 
pated in the coup. 2 

Torrijos was highly regarded by the Panamanian middle and 
lower classes. He himself had grown up in the rural city of Santiago, 

Panama's President and Hero 59 



where his parents taught school. He had risen quickly through the 
ranks of the National Guard, Panama's primary military unit and an 
institution that during the 1960s gained increasing support among 
the poor. Torrijos earned a reputation for listening to the dispos- 
sessed. He walked the streets of their shantytowns, held meetings in 
slums politicians didn't dare to enter, helped the unemployed find 
jobs, and often donated his own limited financial resources to fam- 
ilies stricken by illness or tragedy. 3 

His love of life and his compassion for people reached even 
beyond Panama's borders. Torrijos was committed to turning his 
nation into a haven for fugitives from persecution, a place that 
would offer asylum to refugees from both sides of the political fence, 
from leftist opponents of Chile's Pinochet to right-wing anti-Castro 
guerrillas. Many people saw him as an agent of peace, a perception 
that earned him praise throughout the hemisphere. He also devel- 
oped a reputation as a leader who was dedicated to resolving differ- 
ences among the various factions that were tearing apart so many 
Latin American countries: Honduras, Guatemala, El Salvador, 
Nicaragua, Cuba, Colombia, Peru, Argentina, Chile, and Paraguay. 
His small nation of two million people served as a model of social 
reform and an inspiration for world leaders as diverse as the labor 
organizers who plotted the dismemberment of the Soviet Union and 
Islamic militants like Muammar Gadhafi of Libya. 4 

My first night in Panama, stopped at the traffic light, peering past 
the noisy windshield wipers, I was moved by this man smiling down 
at me from the billboard —handsome, charismatic, and courageous. 
I knew from my hours at the BPL that he stood behind his beliefs. 
For the first time in its history, Panama was not a puppet of Wash- 
ington or of anyone else. Torrijos never succumbed to the tempta- 
tions offered by Moscow or Beijing; he believed in social reform and 
in helping those born into poverty, but he did not advocate commu- 
nism. Unlike Castro, Torrijos was determined to win freedom from 
the United States without forging alliances with the United States' 
enemies. 

I had stumbled across an article in some obscure journal in the 
BPL racks that praised Torrijos as a man who would alter the history 
of the Americas, reversing a long-term trend toward U.S. domina- 
tion. The author cited as his starting point Manifest Destiny — the 
doctrine, popular with many Americans during the 1840s, that 



60 Part II: 1971-1975 



the conquest of North America was divinely ordained; that God, not 
men, had ordered the destruction of Indians, forests, and buffalo, 
the draining of swamps and the channeling of rivers, and the devel- 
opment of an economy that depends on the continuing exploitation 
of labor and natural resources. 

The article got me to thinking about my country's attitude toward 
the world. The Monroe Doctrine, originally enunciated by President 
James Monroe in 1823, was used to take Manifest Destiny a step fur- 
ther when, in the 1850s and 1860s, it was used to assert that the 
United States had special rights all over the hemisphere, including 
the right to invade any nation in Central or South America that re- 
fused to back U.S. policies. Teddy Roosevelt invoked the Monroe 
Doctrine to justify U.S. intervention in the Dominican Republic, in 
Venezuela, and during the "liberation" of Panama from Colombia. A 
string of subsequent U.S. presidents — most notably Taft, Wilson, 
and Franklin Roosevelt — relied on it to expand Washington's Pan- 
American activities through the end of World War II. Finally, during 
the latter half of the twentieth century, the United States used the 
Communist threat to justify expansion of this concept to countries 
around the globe, including Vietnam and Indonesia. 5 

Now, it seemed, one man was standing in Washington's way. I 
knew that he was not the first — leaders like Castro and Allende had 
gone before him — but Torrijos alone was doing it outside the realm 
of Communist ideology and without claiming that his movement 
was a revolution. He was simply saying that Panama had its own 
rights — to sovereignty over its people, its lands, and a waterway that 
bisected it — and that these rights were as valid and as divinely be- 
stowed as any enjoyed by the United States. 

Torrijos also objected to the School of the Americas and to the 
U.S. Southern Command's tropical warfare training center, both lo- 
cated in the Canal Zone. For years, the United States armed forces 
had invited Latin American dictators and presidents to send their 
sons and military leaders to these facilities — the largest and best 
equipped outside North America. There, they learned interrogation 
and covert operational skills as well as military tactics that they 
would use to fight communism and to protect their own assets and 
those of the oil companies and other private corporations. They also 
had opportunities to bond with the United States' top brass. 

These facilities were hated by Latin Americans — except for the 

Panama's President and Hero 61 



few wealthy ones who benefited from them. They were known to 
provide schooling for right-wing death squads and the torturers who 
had turned so many nations into totalitarian regimes. Torrijos made 
it clear that he did not want training centers located in Panama — and 
that he considered the Canal Zone to be included within his borders. 6 

Seeing the handsome general on the billboard, and reading the 
caption beneath his face — "Omar's ideal is freedom; the missile is 
not invented that can kill an ideal!" — I felt a shiver run down my 
spine. I had a premonition that the story of Panama in the twentieth 
century was far from over, and that Torrijos was in for a difficult and 
perhaps even tragic time. 

The tropical storm battered against the windshield, the traffic 
light turned green, and the driver honked his horn at the car ahead 
of us. I thought about my own position. I had been sent to Panama 
to close the deal on what would become MAIN's first truly com- 
prehensive master development plan. This plan would create a jus- 
tification for World Bank, Inter-American Development Bank, and 
USAID investment of billions of dollars in the energy, transporta- 
tion, and agricultural sectors of this tiny and very crucial country. It 
was, of course, a subterfuge, a means of making Panama forever 
indebted and thereby returning it to its puppet status. 

As the taxi started to move through the night, a pa roxysm of guilt 
flashed through me, but I suppressed it. What did I care? I had 
taken the plunge in Java, sold my soul, and now I could create my 
opportunity of a lifetime. I could become rich, famous, and power- 
ful in one blow. 



62 Part li: 1971-1975 



I 



CHAPTER 11 

Pirates in the Canal Zone 



The next day, the Panamanian government sent a man to show me 
around. His name was Fidel, and I was immediately drawn to him. 
He was tall and slim and took an obvious pride in his country. His 
great-great-grandfather had fought beside Bolivar to win indepen- 
dence from Spain. I told him I was related to Tom Paine, and was 
thrilled to learn that Fidel had read Common Sense in Spanish. He 
spoke English, but when he discovered I was fluent in the language 
of his country, he was overcome with emotion. 

"Many of your people live here for years and never bother to learn 
it," he said. 

Fidel took me on a drive through an impressively prosperous sector 
of his city, which he called the New Panama. As we passed modern 
glass-and-steel skyscrapers, he explained that Panama had more in- 
ternational banks than any other country south of the Rio Grande. 

"We're often called the Switzerland of the Americas," he said. "We 
ask very few questions of our clients." 

Late in the afternoon, with the sun sliding toward the Pacific, we 
headed out on an avenue that followed the contours of the bay. A 
long line of ships was anchored there. I asked Fidel whether there 
was a problem with the canal. 

"It's always like this," he replied with a laugh. "Lines of them, 
waiting their turn. Half the traffic is coming from or going to 
Japan. More even than the United States." 

I confessed that this was news to me. 



63 



"I'm not surprised," he said. "North Americans don't know much 
about the rest of the world." 

We stopped at a beautiful park in which bougainvillea crept over 
ancient ruins. A sign proclaimed that this was a fort built to protect 
the city against marauding English pirates. A family was setting up 
for an evening picnic: a father, mother, son and daughter, and an 
elderly man who I assumed was the children's grandfather. I felt a 
sudden longing for the tranquility that seemed to embrace these five 
people. As we passed them, the couple smiled, waved, and greeted us 
in English. I asked if they were tourists, and they laughed. The man 
came over to us. 

"I'm third generation in the Canal Zone," he explained proudly. 
"My granddad came three years after it was created. He drove one of 
the mules, the tractors that hauled ships through the locks." He 
pointed at the elderly man, who was preoccupied helping the chil- 
dren set the picnic table. "My dad was an engineer and I've followed 
in his footsteps." 

The woman had returned to helping her father-in-law and chil- 
dren. Beyond them, the sun dipped into the blue water. It was a 
scene of idyllic beauty, reminiscent of a Monet painting. I asked the 
man if they were U.S. citizens. 

He looked at me incredulously. "Of course. The Canal Zone is U.S. 
territory." The boy ran up to tell his father that dinner was ready. 

"Will your son be the fourth generation?" 

The man brought his hands together in a sign of prayer and 
raised them toward the sky. 

"I pray to the good Lord every day that he may have that oppor- 
tunity. Living in the Zone is a wonderful life." Then he lowered his 
hands and stared directly at Fidel. "I just hope we can hold on to her 
for another fifty years. That despot Torrijos is making a lot of 
waves. A dangerous man." 

A sudden urge gripped me, and I said to him, in Spanish, "Actios. 
I hope you and your family have a good time here, and learn lots 
about Panama's culture." 

He gave me a disgusted look. "I don't speak their language," he 
said. Then he turned abruptly and headed toward his family and the 
picnic. 

Fidel stepped close to me, placed an arm around my shoulders, 
and squeezed tightly. "Thank you," he said. 

64 Part il: 1971-1975 



Back in the city, Fidel drove us through an area he described as 
a slum. 

"Not our worst," he said. "But you'll get the flavor." 

Wooden shacks and ditches filled with standing water lined the 
street, the frail homes suggesting dilapidated boats scuttled in a 
cesspool. The smell of rot and sewage filled our car as children with 
distended bellies ran alongside. When we slowed, they congregated 
at my side, calling me uncle and begging for money. It reminded me 
of Jakarta. 

Graffiti covered many of the walls. There were a few of the usual 
hearts with couples' names scrawled inside, but most of the graffiti 
were slogans expressing hatred of the United States: "Go home, 
gringo," "Stop shitting in our canal," "Uncle Sam, slave master," and 
"Tell Nixon that Panama is not Vietnam." The one that chilled my 
heart the most, however, read, "Death for freedom is the way to Christ." 
Scattered among these were posters of Omar Torrijos. 

"Now the other side," Fidel said. "I've got official papers and you're 
a U.S. citizen, so we can go." Beneath a magenta sky, he drove us into 
the Canal Zone. As prepared as I thought I was, it was not enough. 
I could hardly believe the opulence of the place — huge white build- 
ings, manicured lawns, plush homes, golf courses, stores, and the- 
aters. 

"The facts," he said. "Everything in here is U.S. property. All the 
businesses — the supermarkets, barbershops, beauty salons, restau- 
rants, all of them — are exempt from Panamanian laws and taxes. 
There are seven 18-hoIe golf courses, U.S. post offices scattered con- 
veniently around, U.S. courts of law and schools. It truly is a country 
within a country." 

"What an affront!" 

Fidel peered at me as though making a quick assessment. "Yes," 
he agreed. "That's a pretty good word for it. Over there," he pointed 
back toward the city, "income per capita is less than one thousand 
dollars a year, and unemployment rates are 30 percent. Of course, in 
the little shantytown we just visited, no one makes close to one thou- 
sand dollars, and hardly anyone has a job." 

"What's being done?" 

He turned and gave me a look that seemed to change from anger 
to sadness. 

"What can we do?" He shook his head. "I don't know, but I'll say 

Pirates in the Canal Zone 65 



this: Torrijos is trying. I think it may be the death of him, but he sure 
as hell is giving it all he's got. He's a man who'll go down fighting for 
his people." 

As we headed out of the Canal Zone, Fidel smiled. "You like to 
dance?" Without waiting for me to reply, he said, "Let's get some din- 
ner, and then I'll show you yet another side of Panama." 



66 Part II: 1971-1975 



CHAPTER 12 

Soldiers and Prostitutes 



After a juicy steak and a cold beer, we left the restaurant and drove 
down a dark street. Fidel advised me never to walk in this area. 
"When you come here, take a cab right to the front door." He pointed. 
"Just there, beyond the fence, is the Canal Zone." 

He drove on until we arrived at a vacant lot filled with cars. He 
found an empty spot and parked. An old man hobbled up to us. 
Fidel got out and patted him on the back. Then he ran his hand lov- 
ingly across the fender of his car. 

"Take good care of her. She's my lady." He handed the man a bill. 

We took a short footpath out of the parking lot and suddenly 
found ourselves on a street flooded with flashing neon lights. Two 
boys raced past, pointing sticks at each other and making the 
sounds of men shooting guns. One slammed into Fidel's legs, his 
head reaching barely as high as Fidel's thigh. The little boy stopped 
and stood back. 

"I'm sorry, sir," he gasped in Spanish. 

Fidel placed both his hands on the boys shoulders. "No harm 
done, my man," he said. "But tell me, what were you and your friend 
shooting at?" 

The other boy came up to us. He placed his arm protectively 
around the first. "My brother," he explained. "We're sorry." 

'Tt's okay," Fidel chuckled gently. "He didn't hurt me. I just asked 
him what you guys were shooting at. I think I used to play the same 
game." 



The brothers glanced at each other. The older one smiled. "He's 
the gringo general at the Canal Zone. He tried to rape our mother 
and I'm sending him packing, back to where he belongs." 

Fidel stole a look at me. "Where does he belong?" 

"At home, in the United States." 

"Does your mother work here?" 

"Over there." Both boys pointed proudly at a neon light down the 
street. "Bartender." 

"Go on then." Fidel handed them each a coin. "But be careful. Stay 
in the lights." 

"Oh yes, sir. Thank you." They raced off. 

As we walked on, Fidel explained that Panamanian women were 
prohibited by law from prostitution. "They can tend bar and dance, 
but cannot sell their bodies. That's left to the imports." 

We stepped inside the bar and were blasted with a popular Amer- 
ican song. My eyes and ears took a moment to adjust. A couple of 
burly U.S. soldiers stood near the door; bands around their uniformed 
arms identified them as MPs. 

Fidel led me along a bar, and then I saw the stage. Three young 
women were dancing there, entirely naked except for their heads. 
One wore a sailor's cap, another a green beret, and the third a cowboy 
hat. They had spectacular figures and were laughing. They seemed 
to be playing a game with one another, as though dancing in a com- 
petition. The music, the way they danced, the stage — it could have 
been a disco in Boston, except that they were naked. 

We pushed our way through a group of young English-speaking 
men. Although they wore T-shirts and blue jeans, their crew cuts 
gave them away as soldiers from the Canal Zone's military base. Fi- 
del tapped a waitress on the shoulder. She turned, let out a scream of 
delight, and threw her arms around him. The group of young men 
watched this intently, glancing at one another with disapproval. I 
wondered if they thought Manifest Destiny included this Panaman- 
ian woman. The waitress led us to a corner. From somewhere, she 
produced a small table and two chairs. 

As we settled in, Fidel exchanged greetings in Spanish with two 
men at a table beside ours. Unlike the soldiers, they wore printed 
short-sleeved shirts and creased slacks. The waitress returned with 
a couple of Balboa beers, and Fidel patted her on the rump as she 



68 Part II: 1971-1975 



turned to leave. She smiled and threw him a kiss. I glanced around 
and was relieved to discover that the young men at the bar were no 
longer watching us; they were focused on the dancers. 

The majority of the patrons were English-speaking soldiers, but 
there were others, like the two beside us, who obviously were Pana- 
manians. They stood out because their hair would not have passed 
inspection, and because they did not wear T-shirts and jeans. A few 
of them sat at tables, others leaned against the walls. They seemed to 
be highly alert, like border collies guarding flocks of sheep. 

Women roamed the tables. They moved constantly, sitting on laps, 
shouting to the waitresses, dancing, swirling, singing, taking turns 
on the stage. They wore tight skirts, T-shirts, jeans, clinging dresses, 
high heels. One was dressed in a Victorian gown and veil. Another 
wore only a bikini. It was obvious that only the most beautiful could 
survive here. I marveled at the numbers who made their way to Pana- 
ma and wondered at the desperation that had driven them to this. 

"All from other countries?" I shouted to Fidel above the music. 

He nodded. "Except..." He pointed at the waitresses. "They're 
Panamanian." 

"What countries?" 

"Honduras, El Salvador, Nicaragua, and Guatemala." 

"Neighbors." 

"Not entirely. Costa Rica and Colombia are our closest neighbors." 

The waitress who had led us to this table came and sat on Fidel's 
knee. He gently rubbed her back. 

"Clarissa," he said, "please tell my North American friend why 
they left their countries." He nodded his head in the direction of the 
stage. Three new girls were accepting the hats from the others, who 
jumped down and started dressing. The music switched to salsa, and 
as the newcomers danced, they shed their clothes to the rhythm. 

Clarissa held out her right hand. "I'm pleased to meet you," she 
said. Then she stood up and reached for our empty bottles. "In an- 
swer to Fidel's question, these girls come here to escape brutality. I'll 
bring a couple more Balboas." 

After she left, I turned to Fidel. "Come on," I said. "They're here 
for U.S. dollars." 

"True. But why so many from the countries where fascist dictators 
rule?" 



Soldiers and Prostitutes 69 



I glanced back at the stage. The three of them were giggling and 
throwing the sailors cap around like a ball. I looked Fidel in the eye. 
"You're not kidding, are you?" 

"No," he said seriously, "I wish I were. Most of these girls have lost 
their families — fathers, brothers, husbands, boyfriends. They grew 
up with torture and death. Dancing and prostitution don't seem all 
that bad to them. They can make a lot of money here, then start 
fresh somewhere, buy a little shop, open a cafe — " 

He was interrupted by a commotion near the bar. I saw a waitress 
swing her fist at one of the soldiers, who caught her hand and began 
to twist her wrist. She screamed and fell to her knee. He laughed and 
shouted to his buddies. They all laughed. She tried to hit him with 
her free hand. He twisted harder. Her face contorted with pain. 

The MPs remained by the door, watching calmly. Fidel jumped to 
his feet and started toward the bar. One of the men at the table next 
to ours held out a hand to stop him. "Tranquilo, hermanol' he said. 
"Be calm, brother. Enrique has control."' 

A tall, slim Panamanian came out of the shadows near the stage. 
He moved like a cat and was upon the soldier in an instant. One 
hand encircled the man's throat while the other doused him in the 
face with a glass of water. The waitress slipped away. Several of the 
Panamanians who had been lounging against the walls formed a 
protective semicircle around the tall bouncer. He lifted the soldier 
against the bar and said something I couldn't hear. Then he raised 
his voice and spoke slowly in English, loudly enough for everyone in 
the still room to hear over the music. 

"The waitresses are off-limits to you guys, and you don't touch the 
others until after you pay them." 

The two MPs finally swung into action. They approached the 
cluster of Panamanians. "We'll take it from here, Enrique," they said. 

The bouncer lowered the soldier to the floor and gave his neck a 
final squeeze, forcing the others head back and eliciting a cry of pain. 

"Do you understand me?" There was a feeble groan. "Good." He 
pushed the soldier at the two MPs. "Get him out of here." 



70 Part II: 1971-1975 



CHAPTER 13 

Conversations with the General 



The invitation was completely unexpected. One morning during that 
same 1972 visit, I was sitting in an office I had been given at the In- 
stitute de Recursos Hidraulicos y Electrification, Panama's govern- 
ment-owned electric utility company. I was poring over a sheet of 
statistics when a man knocked gently on the frame of my open door. 
I invited him in, pleased with any excuse to take my attention off the 
numbers. He announced himself as the general's chauffeur and said 
he had come to take me to one of the generals bungalows. 

An hour later, I was sitting across the table from General Omar 
Torrijos. He was dressed casually, in typical Panamanian style: khaki 
slacks and a short-sleeved shirt buttoned down the front, light blue 
with a delicate green pattern. He was tall, fit, and handsome. He 
seemed amazingly relaxed for a man with his responsibilities. A lock 
of dark hair fell over his prominent forehead. 

He asked about my recent travels to Indonesia, Guatemala, and 
Iran. The three countries fascinated him, but he seemed especially 
intrigued with Iran's king, Shah Mohammad Reza Pahlavi. The shah 
had come to power in 1941, after the British and Soviets overthrew 
his father, whom they accused of collaborating with Hitler. 1 

"Can you imagine," Torrijos asked, "being part of a plot to dethrone 
your own father?" 

Panama's head of state knew a good deal about the history of this 
far-offland. We talked about how the tables were turned on the shah 



71 



in 1951, and how his own premier, Mohammad Mossadegh, forced 
him into exile. Torrijos knew, as did most of the world, that it had 
been the CIA that labeled the premier a Communist and that stepped 
in to restore the shah to power. However, he did not know— or at 
least did not mention — the parts Claudine had shared with me, 
about Kermit Roosevelt's brilliant maneuvers and the fact that this 
had been the beginning of a new era in imperialism, the match that 
had ignited the global empire conflagration. 

"After the shah was reinstated," Torrijos continued, "he launched 
a series of revolutionary programs aimed at developing the indus- 
trial sector and bringing Iran into the modern era." 

I asked him how he happened to know so much about Iran. 

"I make it my point," he said. "I don't think too highly of the shah's 
politics — his willingness to overthrow his own father and become a 
CIA puppet— but it looks as though he's doing good things for his 
country. Perhaps I can learn something from him. If he survives." 

"You think he won't?" 

"He has powerful enemies." 

"And some of the world's best bodyguards." 

Torrijos gave me a sardonic look. "His secret police, SAVAK, have 
the reputation of being ruthless thugs. That doesn't win many friends. 
He won't last much longer." He paused, then rolled his eyes. "Body- 
guards? I have a few myself." He waved at the door. "You think they'll 
save my life if your country decides to get rid of me?" 

I asked whether he truly saw that as a possibility. 

He raised his eyebrows in a manner that made me feel foolish for 
asking such a question. "We have the Canal. That's a lot bigger than 
Arbenz and United Fruit." 

I had researched Guatemala, and I understood Torrijos's mean- 
ing. United Fruit Company had been that country's political equiva- 
lent of Panama's canal. Founded in the late 1800s, United Fruit soon 
grew into one of the most powerful forces in Central America. Dur- 
ing the early 1950s, reform candidate Jacobo Arbenz was elected 
president of Guatemala in an election hailed all over the hemisphere 
as a model of the democratic process. At the time, less than 3 percent 
of Guatemalans owned 70 percent of the land. Arbenz promised to 
help the poor dig their way out of starvation, and after his election 
he implemented a comprehensive land reform program. 

"The poor and middle classes throughout Latin America ap- 



plauded Arbenz," Torrijos said. "Personally, he was one of my heroes. 
But we also held our breath. We knew that United Fruit opposed 
these measures, since they were one of the largest and most oppres- 
sive landholders in Guatemala. They also owned big plantations in 
Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Jamaica, Nicaragua, Santo Domingo, 
and here in Panama. They couldn't afford to let Arbenz give the rest 
of us ideas." 

I knew the rest: United Fruit had launched a major public rela- 
tions campaign in the United States, aimed at convincing the Amer- 
ican public and congress that Arbenz was part of a Russian plot and 
that Guatemala was a Soviet satellite. In 1954, the CIA orchestrated 
a coup. American pilots bombed Guatemala City and the democrat- 
ically elected Arbenz was overthrown, replaced by Colonel Carlos 
Castillo Armas, a ruthless right-wing dictator. 

The new government owed everything to United Fruit. By way of 
thanks, the government reversed the land reform process, abolished 
taxes on the interest and dividends paid to foreign investors, elimi- 
nated the secret ballot, and jailed thousands of its critics. Anyone who 
dared to speak out against Castillo was persecuted. Historians trace 
the violence and terrorism that plagued Guatemala for most of the 
rest of the century to the not-so-secret alliance between United Fruit, 
the CIA, and the Guatemalan army under its colonel dictator. 2 

"Arbenz was assassinated," Torrijos continued. "Political and 
character assassination." He paused and frowned. "How could your 
people swallow that CIA rubbish? I won't go so easily. The military 
here are my people. Political assassination won't do." He smiled. 

"The CIA itself will have to kill me!" 

We sat in silence for a few moments, each lost in his own thoughts. 
Torrijos was the first to speak. 

"Do you know who owns United Fruit?" he asked. 

"Zapata Oil, George Bush's company— our UN ambassador." I 
said. 

"A man with ambitions." He leaned forward and lowered his 
voice. "And now I'm up against his cronies at Bechtel." 

This startled me. Bechtel was the world's most powerful engi- 
neering firm and a frequent collaborator on projects with MAIN. In 
the case of Panama's master plan, I had assumed that they were one 
of our major competitors. 

"What do you mean?" 

Conversations with the General 73 



"We've been considering building a new canal, a sea-level one, 
without locks. It can handle bigger ships. The Japanese may be in- 
terested in financing it." 

"They're the Canal's biggest clients." 

"Exactly. Of course, if they provide the money, they will do the 
construction." 

It struck me. "Bechtel will be out in the cold." 

"The biggest construction job in recent history." He paused. 
"Bechtel's loaded with Nixon, Ford, and Bush cronies." (Bush, as U.S. 
ambassador to the UN, and Ford, as House Minority Leader and 
Chairman of the Republican National Convention, were well- 
known to Torrijos as Republican powerbrokers.) "I've been told that 
the Bechtel family pulls the strings of the Republican Party." 

This conversation left me feeling very uncomfortable. I was one 
of the people who perpetuated the system he so despised, and I was 
certain he knew it. My job of convincing him to accept international 
loans in exchange for hiring U.S. engineering and construction firms 
appeared to have hit a mammoth wall. I decided to confront him 
head-on. 

"General," I asked, "why did you invite me here?" 

He glanced at his watch and smiled. "Yes, time now to get down 
to our own business. Panama needs your help. I need your help." 

I was stunned. "My help? What can I do for you?" 

"We will take back the Canal. But that's not enough." He relaxed 
into his chair. "We must also serve as a model. We must show that 
we care about our poor and we must demonstrate beyond any doubt 
that our determination to win our independence is not dictated by 
Russia, China, or Cuba. We must prove to the world that Panama is 
a reasonable country, that we stand not against the United States 
but/or the rights of the poor." 

He crossed one leg over the other. "In order to do that we need to 
build up an economic base that is like none in this hemisphere. Elec- 
tricity, yes — but electricity that reaches the poorest of our poor and 
is subsidized. The same for transportation and communications. 
And especially for agriculture. Doing that will take money — your 
money, the World Bank and the Inter- American Development Bank." 

Once again, he leaned forward. His eyes held mine. "I understand 
that your company wants more work and usually gets it by inflating 
the size of projects — wider highways, bigger power plants, deeper 

74 Part II: 1971-1975 



harbors. This time is different, though. Give me what's best for my 
people, and I'll give you all the work you want." 

What he proposed was totally unexpected, and it both shocked 
and excited me. It certainly defied all I had learned at MAIN. Surely, 
he knew that the foreign aid game was a sham — he had to know. It 
existed to make him rich and to shackle his country with debt. It was 
there so Panama would be forever obligated to the United States and 
the corporatocracy. It was there to keep Latin America on the path of 
Manifest Destiny and forever subservient to Washington and Wall 
Street. I was certain that he knew that the system was based on the 
assumption that all men in power are corruptible, and that his deci- 
sion not to use it for his personal benefit would be seen as a threat, 
a new form of domino that might start a chain reaction and eventu- 
ally topple the entire system. 

I looked across the coffee table at this man who certainly under- 
stood that because of the Canal he enjoyed a very special and unique 
power, and that it placed him in a particularly precarious position. 
He had to be careful. He already had established himself as a leader 
among LDC leaders. If he, like his hero Arbenz, was determined to 
take a stand, the world would be watching. How would the system 
react? More specifically, how would the U.S. government react? 
Latin American history was littered with dead heroes. 

I also knew I was looking at a man who challenged all the justifi- 
cations I had formulated for my own actions. This man certainly had 
his share of personal flaws, but he was no pirate, no Henry Morgan 
or Francis Drake — those swashbuckling adventurers who used let- 
ters of marque from English kings as a cloak to legitimatize piracy. 
The picture on the billboard had not been your typical political de- 
ception. "Omar's ideal is freedom; the missile is not invented that 
can kill an ideal!" Hadn't Tom Paine penned something similar? 

It made me wonder, though. Perhaps ideals do not die, but what 
about the men behind them? Che, Arbenz, Allende; the latter was 
the only one still alive, but for how long? And it raised another ques- 
tion: how would I respond if Torrijos were thrust into the role of 
martyr? 

By the time I left him we both understood that MAIN would get 
the contract for the master plan, and that I would see to it that we 
did Torrijos's bidding. 



Conversations with the General 75 



CHAPTER 14 



Entering a New and Sinister Period 
in Economic History 



As chief economist, I not only was in charge of a department at 
MAIN and responsible for the studies we carried out around the 
globe, but I also was expected to be conversant with current eco- 
nomic trends and theories. The early 1970s were a time of major 
shifts in international economics. 

During the 1960s, a group of countries had formed OPEC, the 
cartel of oil-producing nations, largely in response to the power of 
the big refining companies. Iran was also a major factor. Even though 
the shah owed his position and possibly his life to the United States' 
clandestine intervention during the Mossadegh struggle — or per- 
haps because of that fact — the shah was acutely aware that the 
tables could be turned on him at any time. The heads of state of other 
petroleum-rich nations shared this awareness and the paranoia that 
accompanied it. They also knew that the major international oil 
companies, known as "The Seven Sisters," were collaborating to hold 
down petroleum prices — and thus the revenues they paid to the pro- 
ducing countries — as a means of reaping their own windfall profits. 
OPEC was organized in order to strike back. 

This all came to a head in the early 1970s, when OPEC brought 
the industrial giants to their knees. A series of concerted actions, 
ending with a 1973 oil embargo symbolized by long lines at U.S. gas 
stations, threatened to bring on an economic catastrophe rivaling 
the Great Depression. It was a systemic shock to the developed 



76 



world economy, and of a magnitude that few people could begin 
to comprehend. 

The oil crisis could not have come at a worse time for the United 
States. It was a confused nation, full of fear and self-doubt, reeling 
from a humiliating war in Vietnam and a president who was about 
to resign. Nixon's problems were not limited to Southeast Asia and 
Watergate. He had stepped up to the plate during an era that, in ret- 
rospect, would be understood as the threshold of a new epoch in 
world politics and economics. In those days, it seemed that the "little 
guys," including the OPEC countries, were getting the upper hand. 

I was fascinated by world events. My bread was buttered by the 
corporatocracy, yet some secret side of me enjoyed watching my 
masters being put in their places. I suppose it assuaged my guilt a 
bit. I saw the shadow of Thomas Paine standing on the sidelines, 
cheering OPEC on. 

None of us could have been aware of the full impact of the em- 
bargo at the time it was happening. We certainly had our theories, 
but we could not understand what has since become clear. In hind- 
sight, we know that economic growth rates after the oil crisis were 
about half those prevailing in the 1950s and 1960s, and that they 
have taken place against much greater inflationary pressure. The 
growth that did occur was structurally different and did not create 
nearly as many jobs, so unemployment soared. To top it all off, the 
international monetary system took a blow; the network of fixed 
exchange rates, which had prevailed since the end of World War II, 
essentially collapsed. 

During that time, I frequently got together with friends to discuss 
these matters over lunch or over beers after work. Some of these peo- 
ple worked for me — my staff included very smart men and women, 
mostly young, who for the most part were freethinkers, at least by 
conventional standards. Others were executives at Boston think tanks 
or professors at local colleges, and one was an assistant to a state 
congressman. These were informal meetings, sometimes attended 
by as few as two of us, while others might include a dozen partici- 
pants. The sessions were always lively and raucous. 

When I look back at those discussions, I am embarrassed by the 
sense of superiority I often felt. I knew things I could not share. My 
friends sometimes flaunted their credentials — connections on Beacon 



Entering a New and Sinister Period in Economic History 77 



Hill or in Washington, professorships and PhDs — and I would an- 
swer this in my role as chief economist of a major consulting firm, 
who traveled around the world first class. Yet, I could not discuss my 
private meetings with men like Torrijos, or the things I knew about 
the ways we were manipulating countries on every continent. It was 
both a source of inner arrogance and a frustration. 

When we talked about the power of the little guys, I had to exer- 
cise a great deal of restraint. I knew what none of them could possibly 
know, that the corporatocracy, its band of EHMs, and the jackals 
waiting in the background would never allow the little guys to gain 
control. I only had to draw upon the examples of Arbenz and 
Mossadegh — and more recently, upon the 1973 CIA overthrow of 
Chile s democratically elected president, Salvador Allende. In fact, I 
understood that the stranglehold of global empire was growing 
stronger, despite OPEC — or, as I suspected at the time but did not 
confirm until later, with OPEC's help. 

Our conversations often focused on the similarities between the 
early 1970s and the 1930s. The latter represented a major watershed 
in the international economy and in the way it was studied, analyzed, 
and perceived. That decade opened the door to Keynesian economics 
and to the idea that government should play a major role in manag- 
ing markets and providing services such as health, unemployment 
compensation, and other forms of welfare. We were moving away 
from old assumptions that markets were self-regulating and that the 
state's intervention should be minimal. 

The Depression resulted in the New Deal and in policies that pro- 
moted economic regulation, governmental financial manipulation, 
and the extensive application of fiscal policy. In addition, both the 
Depression and World War II led to the creation of organizations 
like the World Bank, the IMF, and the General Agreement on Tariffs 
and Trade (GATT). The 1960s was a pivotal decade in this period 
and in the shift from neoclassic to Keynesian economics. It happened 
under the Kennedy and Johnson administrations, and perhaps the 
most important single influence was one man, Robert McNamara. 

McNamara was a frequent visitor to our discussion groups — in 
absentia, of course. We all knew about his meteoric rise to fame, 
from manager of planning and financial analysis at Ford Motor 
Company in 1949 to Ford's president in I960, the first company 



78 Part II: 1971-1975 



head selected from outside the Ford family. Shortly after that, 
Kennedy appointed him secretary of defense. 

McNamara became a strong advocate of a Keynesian approach to 
government, using mathematical models and statistical approaches 
to determine troop levels, allocation of funds, and other strategies in 
Vietnam. His advocacy of "aggressive leadership" became a hallmark 
not only of government managers but also of corporate executives. It 
formed the basis of a new philosophical approach to teaching man- 
agement at the nation's top business schools, and it ultimately led to a 
new breed of CEOs who would spearhead the rush to global empire. 1 

As we sat around the table discussing world events, we were es- 
pecially fascinated by McNamara's role as president of the World 
Bank, a job he accepted soon after leaving his post as secretary of de- 
fense. Most of my friends focused on the fact that he symbolized what 
was popularly known as the military-industrial complex. He had 
held the top position in a major corporation, in a government cabinet, 
and now at the most powerful bank in the world. Such an apparent 
breach in the separation of powers horrified many of them; I may 
have been the only one among us who was not in the least surprised. 

I see now that Robert McNamara's greatest and most sinister 
contribution to history was to jockey the World Bank into becoming 
an agent of global empire on a scale never before witnessed. He also 
set a precedent. His ability to bridge the gaps between the primary 
components of the corporatocracy would be fine-tuned by his suc- 
cessors. For instance, George Shultz was secretary of the treasury 
and chairman of the Council on Economic Policy under Nixon, 
served as Bechtel president, and then became secretary of state under 
Reagan. Caspar Weinberger was a Bechtel vice president and general 
council, and later the secretary of defense under Reagan. Richard 
Helms was Johnson's CIA director and then became ambassador to 
Iran under Nixon. Richard Cheney served as secretary of defense 
under George H. W. Bush, as Halliburton president, and as U.S. vice 
president to George W Bush. Even a president of the United States, 
George H. W. Bush, began as founder of Zapata Petroleum Corp, 
served as U.S. ambassador to the U.N. under presidents Nixon and 
Ford, and was Ford's CIA director. 

Looking back, I am struck by the innocence of those days. In many 
respects, we were still caught up in the old approaches to empire 



Entering a New and Sinister Period in Economic History 79 



building. Kermit Roosevelt had shown us a better way when he over- 
threw an Iranian democrat and replaced him with a despotic king. 
We EHMs were accomplishing many of our objectives in places like 
Indonesia and Ecuador, and yet Vietnam was a stunning example of 
how easily we could slip back into old patterns. 

It would take the leading member of OPEC, Saudi Arabia, to 
change that. 



80 Part ii: 1971-1975 



CHAPTER 15 



The Saudi Arabian 
Money-laundering Affair 



In 1974, a diplomat from Saudi Arabia showed me photos of Riyadh, 
the capital of his country. Included in these photos was a herd of 
goats rummaging among piles of refuse outside a government build- 
ing. When I asked the diplomat about them, his response shocked 
me. He told me that they were the city's main garbage disposal system. 

"No self-respecting Saudi would ever collect trash," he said. "We 
leave it to the beasts." 

Goats! In the capital of the world's greatest oil kingdom. It seemed 
unbelievable. 

At the time, I was one of a group of consultants just beginning to 
try to piece together a solution to the oil crisis. Those goats led me to 
an understanding of how that solution might evolve, especially given 
the country's pattern of development over the previous three centuries. 

Saudi Arabia's history is full of violence and religious fanaticism. 
In the eighteenth century, Mohammed ibn Saud, a local warlord, 
joined forces with fundamentalists from the ultraconservative Wah- 
habi sect. It was a powerful union, and during the next two hundred 
years the Saud family and their Wahhabi allies conquered most of 
the Arabian Peninsula, including Islam's holiest sites, Mecca and 
Medina. 

Saudi society reflected the puritanical idealism of its founders, 
and a strict interpretation of Koranic beliefs was enforced. Religious 
police ensured adherence to the mandate to pray five times a day. 



81 



Women were required to cover themselves from head to toe. Pun- 
ishment for criminals was severe; public executions and stonings 
were common. During my first visit to Riyadh, I was amazed when 
my driver told me I could leave my camera, briefcase, and even my 
wallet in plain sight inside our car, parked near the open market, 
without locking it. 

"No one," he said, "would think of stealing here. Thieves have 
their hands cut off." 

Later that day, he asked me if I would like to visit so-called Chop 
Chop Square and watch a beheading. Wahhabism's adherence to 
what we would consider extreme puritanism made the streets safe 
from thieves — and demanded the harshest form of corporal pun- 
ishment for those who violated the laws. I declined the imitation. 

The Saudi view of religion as an important element of politics 
and economics contributed to the oil embargo that shook the Western 
world. On October 6, 1973 (Yom Kippur, the holiest of Jewish holi- 
days), Egypt and Syria launched simultaneous attacks on Israel. It was 
the beginning of the October War — the fourth and most destructive 
of the Arab-Israeli wars, and the one that would have the greatest 
impact on the world. Egypt's President Sadat pressured Saudi Ara- 
bia's King Faisal to retaliate against the United States' complicity 
with Israel by employing what Sadat referred to as "the oil weapon." 
On October 16, Iran and the five Arab Gulf states, including Saudi 
Arabia, announced a 70 percent increase in the posted price of oil. 

Meeting in Kuwait City, Arab oil ministers pondered further op- 
tions. The Iraqi representative was vehemently in favor of targeting 
the United States. He called on the other delegates to nationalize 
American businesses in the Arab world, to impose a total oil embargo 
on the United States and on all other nations friendly to Israel, and 
to withdraw Arab funds from every American bank. He pointed out 
that Arab bank accounts were substantial and that this action could 
result in a panic not unlike that of 1929. 

Other Arab ministers were reluctant to agree to such a radical 
plan, but on October 17 they did decide to move forward with a more 
limited embargo, which would begin with a 5 percent cut in pro- 
duction and then impose an additional 5 percent reduction every 
month until their political objectives were met. They agreed that the 
United States should be punished for its pro-Israeli stance and 
should therefore have the most severe embargo levied against it. 

82 Part II: 1971-1975 



Several of the countries attending the meeting announced that they 
would implement cutbacks of 10 percent, rather than 5 percent. 

On October 19, President Nixon asked Congress for $2.2 billion 
in aid to Israel. The next day, Saudi Arabia and other Arab produc- 
ers imposed a total embargo on oil shipments to the United States. 1 

The oil embargo ended on March 18, 1974. Its duration was short, 
its impact immense. The selling price of Saudi oil leaped from SI. 39 
a barrel on January 1, 1970, to $8.32 on January 1, 1974. 2 Politicians 
and future administrations would never forget the lessons learned 
during the early- to mid-1970s. In the long run, the trauma of those 
few months served to strengthen the corporatocracy; its three pillars 
— big corporations, international banks, and government — bonded 
as never before. That bond would endure. 

The embargo also resulted in significant attitude and policy 
changes. It convinced Wall Street and Washington that such an em- 
bargo could never again be tolerated. Protecting our oil supplies had 
always been a priority; after 1973, it became an obsession. The em- 
bargo elevated Saudi Arabia's status as a player in world politics and 
forced Washington to recognize the kingdom's strategic importance 
to our own economy. Furthermore, it encouraged U.S. corporatoc- 
racy leaders to search desperately for methods to funnel petrodollars 
back to America, and to ponder the fact that the Saudi government 
lacked the administrative and institutional frameworks to properly 
manage its mushrooming wealth. 

For Saudi Arabia, the additional oil income resulting from the 
price hikes was a mixed blessing. It filled the national coffers with 
billions of dollars; however, it also served to undermine some of the 
strict religious beliefs of the Wahhabis. Wealthy Saudis traveled 
around the world. They attended schools and universities in Europe 
and the United States. They bought fancy cars and furnished their 
houses with Western-style goods. Conservative religious beliefs were 
replaced by a new form of materialism — and it was this materialism 
that presented a solution to fears of future oil crises. 

Almost immediately after the embargo ended, Washington began 
negotiating with the Saudis, offering them technical support, military 
hardware and training, and an opportunity to bring their nation into 
the twentieth century, in exchange for petrodollars and, most impor- 
tantly, assurances that there would never again be another oil embargo. 
The negotiations resulted in the creation of a most extraordinary 



The Saudi Arabian Money-laundering Affair 83 



organization, the United States-Saudi Arabian Joint Economic Com- 
mission. Known as JECOR, it embodied an innovative concept that 
was the opposite of traditional foreign aid programs: it relied on 
Saudi money to hire American firms to build up Saudi Arabia. 

Although overall management and fiscal responsibility were 
delegated to the U.S. Department of the Treasury, this commission 
was independent to the extreme. Ultimately, it would spend billions 
of dollars over a period of more than twenty-five years, with virtually 
no congressional oversight. Because no U.S. funding was involved, 
Congress had no authority in the matter, despite Treasury's role. After 
studying JECOR extensively, David Holden and Richard Johns con- 
clude, "It was the most far-reaching agreement of its kind ever 
concluded by the U.S. with a developing country. It had the potential 
to entrench the U.S. deeply in the Kingdom, fortifying the concept of 
mutual interdependence." 3 

The Department of the Treasury brought MAIN in at an early 
stage to serve as an adviser. I was summoned and told that my job 
would be critical, and that everything I did and learned should be 
considered highly confidential. From my vantage point, it seemed 
like a clandestine operation. At the time, I was led to believe that 
MAIN was the lead consultant in that process; I subsequently 
came to realize that we were one of several consultants whose ex- 
pertise was sought. 

Since everything was done in the greatest secrecy, I was not privy 
to Treasury's discussions with other consultants, and I therefore 
cannot be certain about the importance of my role in this precedent- 
setting deal. I do know that the arrangement established new stan- 
dards for EHMs and that it launched innovative alternatives to the 
traditional approaches for advancing the interests of empire. I also 
know that most of the scenarios that evolved from my studies were 
ultimately implemented, that MAIN was rewarded with one of the 
first major — and extremely profitable — contracts in Saudi Arabia, 
and that I received a large bonus that year. 

My job was to develop forecasts of what might happen in Saudi 
Arabia if vast amounts of money were invested in its infrastructure, 
and to map out scenarios for spending that money. In short, I was 
asked to apply as much creativity as I could to justifying the infusion of 
hundreds of millions of dollars into the Saudi Arabian economy, un- 
der conditions that would include U.S. engineering and construction 



84. Part II: 1971-1975 



companies. I was told to do this on my own, not to rely on my staff, 
and I was sequestered in a small conference room several floors 
above the one where my department was located. I was warned that 
my job was both a matter of national security and potentially very lu- 
crative for MAIN. 

I understood, of course, that the primary objective here was not 
the usual —to burden this country with debts it could never repay— 
but rather to find ways that would assure that a large portion of 
petrodollars found their way back to the United States. In the process, 
Saudi Arabia would be drawn in, its economy would become increas- 
ingly intertwined with and dependent upon ours, and presumably it 
would grow more Westernized and therefore more sympathetic with 
and integrated into our system. 

Once I got started, I realized that the goats wandering the streets 
of Riyadh were the symbolic key; they were a sore point among 
Saudis jet-setting around the world. Those goats begged to be replaced 
by something more appropriate for this desert kingdom that craved 
entry into the modern world. I also knew that OPEC economists 
were stressing the need for oil-rich countries to obtain more value- 
added products from their petroleum. Rather than simply exporting 
crude oil, the economists were urging these countries to develop in- 
dustries of their own, to use this oil to produce petroleum-based 
products they could sell to the rest of the world at a higher price than 
that brought by the crude itself. 

This twin realization opened the door to a strategy I felt certain 
would be a win-win situation for everyone. The goats, of course, were 
merely an entry point. Oil revenues could be employed to hire U.S. 
companies to replace the goats with the world's most modern garbage 
collection and disposal system, and the Saudis could take great pride 
in this state-of-the-art technology. 

I came to think of the goats as one side of an equation that could 
be applied to most of the kingdom's economic sectors, a formula for 
success in the eyes of the royal family, the U.S. Department of the 
Treasury, and my bosses at MAIN. Under this formula, money would 
be earmarked to create an industrial sector focused on transforming 
raw petroleum into finished products for export. Large petrochem- 
ical complexes would rise from the desert, and around them, huge 
industrial parks. Naturally, such a plan would also require the con- 
struction of thousands of megawatts of electrical generating capacity, 

The Saudi Arabian Money-laundering Affair 85 



transmission and distribution lines, highways, pipelines, communi- 
cations networks, and transportation systems, including new airports, 
improved seaports, a vast array of service industries, and the infra- 
structure essential to keep all these cogs turning. 

We all had high expectations that this plan would evolve into 
a model of how things should be done in the rest of the world. 
Globe-trotting Saudis would sing our praises; they would invite 
leaders from many countries to come to Saudi Arabia and witness 
the miracles we had accomplished; those leaders would then call on 
us to help them devise similar plans for their countries and — in 
most cases, for countries outside the ring of OPEC — would arrange 
World Bank or other debt-ridden methods for financing them. The 
global empire would be well served. 

As I worked through these ideas, I thought of the goats, and the 
words of my driver often echoed in my ears: "No self-respecting 
Saudi would ever collect trash." I had heard that refrain repeatedly, 
in many different contexts. It was obvious that the Saudis had no 
intention of putting their own people to work at menial tasks, 
whether as laborers in industrial facilities or in the actual construc- 
tion of any of the projects. In the first place, there were too few of 
them. In addition, the royal House of Saud had indicated a commit- 
ment to providing its citizens with a level of education and a 
lifestyle that were inconsistent with those of manual laborers. The 
Saudis might manage others, but they had no desire or motivation to 
become factory and construction workers. Therefore, it would be 
necessary to import a labor force from other countries — countries 
where labor was cheap and where people needed work. If possible, 
the labor should come from other Middle Eastern or Islamic coun- 
tries, such as Egypt, Palestine, Pakistan, and Yemen. 

This prospect created an even greater new stratagem for devel- 
opment opportunities. Mammoth housing complexes would have to 
be constructed for these laborers, as would shopping malls, hospitals, 
fire and police department facilities, water and sewage treatment 
plants, electrical, communications, and transportation networks — 
in fact, the end result would be to create modern cities where once 
only deserts had existed. Here, too, was the opportunity to explore 
emerging technologies in, for example, desalinization plants, micro- 
wave systems, health care complexes, and computer technologies. 

Saudi Arabia was a planner's dream come true, and also a fantasy 



86 Part II: 1971-1975 



realized for anyone associated with the engineering and construc- 
tion business. It presented an economic opportunity unrivaled by 
any other in history: an underdeveloped country with virtually un- 
limited financial resources and a desire to enter the modern age in a 
big way, very quickly. 

I must admit that I enjoyed this job immensely. There was no 
solid data available in Saudi Arabia, in the Boston Public Library, or 
anywhere else that justified the use of econometric models in this 
context. In fact, the magnitude of the job — the total and immediate 
transformation of an entire nation on a scale never before witnessed 
— meant that even had historical data existed, it would have been 
irrelevant. 

Nor was anyone expecting this type of quantitative analysis, at 
least not at this stage of the game. I simply put my imagination to 
work and wrote reports that envisioned a glorious future for the 
kingdom. I had rule-of -thumb numbers I could use to estimate such 
things as the approximate cost to produce a megawatt of electricity, 
a mile of road, or adequate water, sewage, housing, food, and public 
services for one laborer. I was not supposed to refine these estimates or 
to draw final conclusions. My job was simply to describe a series of 
plans (more accurately, perhaps, "visions ") of what might be possible, 
and to arrive at rough estimates of the costs associated with them. 

I always kept in mind the true objectives: maximizing payouts to 
U.S. firms and making Saudi Arabia increasingly dependent on the 
United States. It did not take long to realize how closely the two 
went together; almost all the newly developed projects would require 
continual upgrading and servicing, and they were so highly technical 
as to assure that the companies that originally developed them would 
have to maintain and modernize them. In fact, as I moved forward 
with my work, I began to assemble two lists for each of the projects 
I envisioned: one for the types of design-and-construction contracts 
we could expect, and another for long-term service and management 
agreements. MAIN, Bechtel, Brown & Root, Halliburton, Stone & 
Webster, and many other U.S. engineers and contractors would 
profit handsomely for decades to come. 

Beyond the purely economic, there was another twist that would 
render Saudi Arabia dependent on us, though in a very different way. 
The modernization of this oil-rich kingdom would trigger adverse 
reactions. For instance, conservative Muslims would be furious; Israel 



The Saudi Arabian Money-laundering Affair 87 



and other neighboring countries would feel threatened. The eco- 
nomic development of this nation was likely to spawn the growth of 
another industry: protecting the Arabian Peninsula. Private compa- 
nies specializing in such activities, as well as the U.S. military and 
defense industry, could expect generous contracts — and, once again, 
long-term service and management agreements. Their presence 
would require another phase of engineering and construction proj- 
ects, including airports, missile sites, personnel bases, and all of the 
infrastructure associated with such facilities. 

I sent my reports in sealed envelopes through interoffice mail, ad- 
dressed to "Treasury Department Project Manager." I occasionally 
met with a couple of other members of our team — vice presidents at 
MAIN and my superiors. Sincawe had no official name for this proj- 
ect, which was still in the research and development phase and was 
not yet part of JECOR, we referred to it only — and with hushed 
voices — as SAMA. Ostensibly, this stood for Saudi Arabian Money- 
laundering Affair, but it was also a tongue-in-cheek play on words; 
the kingdom's central bank was called the Saudi Arabian Monetary 
Agency, or SAMA. 

Sometimes a Treasury representative would join us. I asked few 
questions during these meetings. Mainly, I just described my work, 
responded to their comments, and agreed to try to do whatever was 
asked of me. The vice presidents and Treasury representatives were 
especially impressed with my ideas about the long-term service and 
management agreements. It prodded one of the vice presidents to 
coin a phrase we often used after that, referring to the kingdom as 
"the cow we can milk until the sun sets on our retirement." For me, 
that phrase always conjured images of goats rather than cows. 

It was during those meetings that I came to realize that several of 
our competitors were involved in similar tasks, and that in the end 
we all expected to be awarded lucrative contracts as a result of our 
efforts. I assumed that MAIN and the other firms were footing the 
bill for this preliminary work, taking a short-term risk in order to 
throw our hats into the ring. This assumption was reinforced by the 
fact that the number I charged my time to on our daily personal time 
sheets appeared to be a general and administrative overhead ac- 
count. Such an approach was typical of the research and develop- 
ment/proposal preparation phase of most projects. In this case, the 



Part II: 1971-1975 



initial investment certainly far exceeded the norm, but those vice 
presidents seemed extremely confident about the payback. 

Despite the knowledge that our competitors were also involved, 
we all assumed that there was enough work to go around. I also had 
been in the business long enough to believe that the rewards be- 
stowed would reflect the level of Treasury's acceptance of the work 
we had done, and that those consultants who came up with the ap- 
proaches that were finally implemented would receive the choicest 
contracts. I took it as a personal challenge to create scenarios that 
would make it to the design-and-construct stage. My star was al- 
ready rising rapidly at MAIN. Being a key player in SAMA would 
guarantee its acceleration, if we were successful. 

During our meetings, we also openly discussed the likelihood that 
SAMA and the entire JECOR operation would set new precedents. 
It represented an innovative approach to creating lucrative work in 
countries that did not need to incur debts through the international 
banks. Iran and Iraq came immediately to mind as two additional 
examples of such countries. Moreover, given human nature, we felt 
that the leaders of such countries would likely be motivated to try 
to emulate Saudi Arabia. There seemed little doubt that the 1973 
oil embargo— which had initially appeared to be so negative — 
would end up offering many unexpected gifts to the engineering and 
construction business, and would help to further pave the road to 
global empire. 

I worked on that visionary phase for about eight months — although 
never for more than several intense days at a time — sequestered in 
my private conference room or in my apartment overlooking Boston 
Common. My staff all had other assignments and pretty much took 
care of themselves, although I checked in on them periodically. Over 
time, the secrecy around our work declined. More people became 
aware that something big involving Saudi Arabia was going on. Ex- 
citement swelled, rumors swirled. The vice presidents and Treasury 
representatives grew more open — in part, I believe, because they 
themselves became privy to more information as details about the 
ingenious scheme emerged. 

Under this evolving plan, Washington wanted the Saudis to 
guarantee to maintain oil supplies and prices at levels that could 
fluctuate but that would always remain acceptable to the United 



The Saudi Arabian Money-laundering Affair 89 



States and our allies. If other countries such as Iran, Iraq, Indonesia, 
or Venezuela threatened embargoes, Saudi Arabia, with its vast pe- 
troleum supplies, would step in to fill the gap; simply the knowledge 
that they might do so would, in the long run, discourage other coun- 
tries from even considering an embargo. In exchange for this guar- 
antee, Washington would offer the House of Saud an amazingly 
attractive deal: a commitment to provide total and unequivocal U.S. 
political and — if necessary — military support, thereby ensuring 
their continued existence as the rulers of their country. 

It was a deal the House of Saud could hardly refuse, given its ge- 
ographic location, lack of military might, and general vulnerability 
to neighbors like Iran, Syria, Iraq, and Israel. Naturally, therefore, 
Washington used its advantage to impose one other critical condi- 
tion, a condition that redefined the role of EHMs in the world and 
served as a model we would later attempt to apply in other countries, 
most notably in Iraq. In retrospect, I sometimes find it difficult to 
understand how Saudi Arabia could have accepted this condition. 
Certainly, most of the rest of the Arab world, OPEC, and other Is- 
lamic countries were appalled when they discovered the terms of the 
deal and the manner in which the royal house capitulated to Wash- 
ington's demands. 

The condition was that Saudi Arabia would use its petrodollars to 
purchase U.S. government securities; in turn, the interest earned by 
these securities would be spent by the U.S. Department of the Trea- 
sury in ways that enabled Saudi Arabia to emerge from a medieval 
society into the modern, industrialized world. In other words, the 
interest compounding on billions of dollars of the kingdom's oil in- 
come would be used to pay U.S. companies to fulfill the vision I (and 
presumably some of my competitors) had come up with, to convert 
Saudi Arabia into a modern industrial power. Our own U.S. De- 
partment of the Treasury would hire us, at Saudi expense, to build 
infrastructure projects and even entire cities throughout the Arabian 
Peninsula. 

Although the Saudis reserved the right to provide input regarding 
the general nature of these projects, the reality was that an elite 
corps of foreigners (mostly infidels, in the eyes of Muslims) would 
determine the future appearance and economic makeup of the Ara- 
bian Peninsula. And this would occur in a kingdom founded on con- 
servative Wahhabi principles and run according to those principles 



90 Part tf: 1971-1975 



for several centuries. It seemed a huge leap of faith on their part, yet 
under the circumstances, and due to the political and military pres- 
sures undoubtedly brought to bear by Washington, I suspected the 
Saud family felt they had few alternatives. 

From our perspective, the prospects for immense profits seemed 
limitless. It was a sweetheart deal with potential to set an amazing 
precedent. And to make the deal even sweeter, no one had to obtain 
congressional approval — a process loathed by corporations, particu- 
larly privately owned ones like Bechtel and MAIN, which prefer not 
to open their books or share their secrets with anyone. Thomas W. 
Lippman, an adjunct scholar at the Middle East Institute and a for- 
mer journalist, eloquently summarizes the salient points of this deal: 

The Saudis, rolling in cash, would deliver hundreds of 
millions of dollars to Treasury, which held on to the funds 
until they were needed to pay vendors or employees. This 
system assured that the Saudi money would be recycled 
back into the American economy... It also ensured that 
the commission's managers could undertake whatever 
projects they and the Saudis agreed were useful without 
having to justify them to Congress. 4 

Establishing the parameters for this historic undertaking took 
less time than anyone could have imagined. After that, however, we 
had to figure out a way to implement it. To set the process in motion, 
someone at the highest level of government was dispatched to Saudi 
Arabia — an extremely confidential mission. I never knew for sure, 
but I believe the envoy was Henry Kissinger. 

Whoever the envoy was, his first job was to remind the royal family 
about what had happened in neighboring Iran when Mossadegh 
tried to oust British petroleum interests. Next, he would outline a 
plan that would be too attractive for them to turn down, in effect 
conveying to the Saudis that they had few alternatives. I have no 
doubt that they were left with the distinct impression that they could 
either accept our offer and thus gain assurances that we would sup- 
port and protect them as rulers, or they could refuse — and go the 
way of Mossadegh. When the envoy returned to Washington, he 
brought with him the message that the Saudis would like to comply. 

There was just one slight obstacle. We would have to convince key 

The Saudi Arabian Money-laundering Aft'air 91 



players in the Saudi government. This, we were informed, was a 
family matter. Saudi Arabia was not a democracy, and yet it seemed 
that within the House of Saud there was a need for consensus. 

In 1975, I was assigned to one of those key players. I always 
thought of him as Prince W., although I never determined that he 
was actually a crown prince. My job was to persuade him that the 
Saudi Arabia Money-laundering Affair would benefit his country as 
well as him personally. 

This was not as easy as it appeared at first. Prince W. professed 
himself a good Wahhabi and insisted that he did not want to see his 
country follow in the footsteps of Western commercialism. He also 
claimed that he understood the insidious nature of what we were 
proposing. We had, he said, the same objectives as the crusaders a 
millennium earlier: the Christianization of the Arab world. In fact, 
he was partially right about this. In my opinion, the difference be- 
tween the crusaders and us was a matter of degree. Europe's medieval 
Catholics claimed their goal was to save Muslims from purgatory; 
we claimed that we wanted to help the Saudis modernize. In truth, 
I believe the crusaders, like the corporatocracy, were primarily 
seeking to expand their empire. 

Religious beliefs aside, Prince W had one weakness — for beautiful 
blonds. It seems almost ludicrous to mention what has now become 
an unfair stereotype, and I should mention that Prince W. was the 
only man among many Saudis I have known who had this proclivity, 
or at least the only one who was willing to let me see it. Yet, it played 
a role in structuring this historic deal, and it demonstrates how far 
I would go to complete my mission. 



92 Part II: 1971-1975 



CHAPTER 16 



Pimping, and Financing 
Osama bin Laden 



From the start, Prince W. let me know that whenever he came to 
visit me in Boston he expected to be entertained by a woman of his 
liking, and that he expected her to perform more functions than those 
of a simple escort. But he most definitely did not want a professional 
call girl, someone he or his family members might bump into on the 
street or at a cocktail party. My meetings with Prince W. were held in 
secret, which made it easier for me to comply with his wishes. 

"Sally" was a beautiful blue-eyed blond woman who lived in the 
Boston area. Her husband, a United Airlines pilot who traveled a great 
deal both on and off the job, made little attempt to hide his infideli- 
ties. Sally had a cavalier attitude about her husband's activities. She 
appreciated his salary, the plush Boston condo, and the benefits a 
pilot's spouse enjoyed in those days. A decade earlier, she had been 
a hippie who had become accustomed to promiscuous sex, and she 
found the idea of a secret source of income attractive. She agreed to 
give Prince W. a try, on one condition: she insisted that the future of 
their relationship depended entirely upon his behavior and attitude 
toward her. 

Fortunately for me, each met the other's criteria. 

The Prince W.-Sally Affair, a subchapter of the Saudi Arabia 
Money-laundering Affair, created its own set of problems for me. 
MAIN strictly prohibited its partners from doing anything illicit. 
From a legal standpoint, I was procuring sex — pimping — an illegal 
activity in Massachusetts, and so the main problem was figuring out 



93 



how to pay for Sally's services. Luckily, the accounting department 
allowed me great liberties with my expense account. I was a good 
tipper, and I managed to persuade waiters in some of the most posh 
restaurants in Boston to provide me with blank receipts; it was an 
era when people, not computers, filled out receipts. 

Prince W. grew bolder as time went by. Eventually, he wanted me 
to arrange for Sally to come and live in his private cottage in Saudi 
Arabia. This was not an unheard-of request in those days; there was 
an active trade in young women between certain European countries 
and the Middle East. These women were given contracts for some 
specified period of time, and when the contract expired they went 
home to very substantial bank accounts. Robert Baer, a case officer 
in the CIA's directorate of operations for twenty years, and a spe- 
cialist in the Middle East, sums it up: "In the early 1970s, when the 
petrodollars started flooding in, enterprising Lebanese began smug- 
gling hookers into the kingdom for the princes... Since no one in the 
royal family knows how to balance a checkbook, the Lebanese be- 
came fabulously wealthy." 1 

I was familiar with this situation and even knew people who 
could arrange such contracts. However, for me, there were two major 
obstacles: Sally and the payment. I was certain Sally was not about 
to leave Boston and move to a desert mansion in the Middle East. It 
was also pretty obvious that no collection of blank restaurant re- 
ceipts would cover this expense. 

Prince W. took care of the latter concern by assuring me that he 
expected to pay for his new mistress himself; I was only required to 
make the arrangements. It also gave me great relief when he went on 
to confide that the Saudi Arabian Sally did not have to be the exact 
same person as the one who had kept him company in the United 
States. I made calls to several friends who had Lebanese contacts in 
London and Amsterdam. Within a couple of weeks, a surrogate Sally 
signed a contract. 

Prince W. was a complex person. Sally satisfied a corporeal desire, 
and my ability to help the prince in this regard earned me his trust. 
However, it by no means convinced him that SAMA was a strategy 
he wanted to recommend for his country. I had to work very hard to 
win my case. I spent many hours showing him statistics and helping 
him analyze studies we had undertaken for other countries, including 
the econometric models I had developed for Kuwait while training 



94 Part II: 1971-1975 



with Claudine, during those first few months before heading to In- 
donesia. Eventually he relented. 

I am not familiar with the details of what went on between my 
fellow EHMs and the other key Saudi players. All I know is that the 
entire package was finally approved by the royal family. MAIN was 
rewarded for its part with one of the first highly lucrative contracts, 
administered by the U.S. Department of the Treasury. We were com- 
missioned to make a complete survey of the country's disorganized 
and outmoded electrical system and to design a new one that would 
meet standards equivalent to those in the United States. 

As usual, it was my job to send in the first team, to develop eco- 
nomic and electric load forecasts for each region of the country. 
Three of the men who worked for me — all experienced in interna- 
tional projects — were preparing to leave for Riyadh when word came 
down from our legal department that under the terms of the con- 
tract we were obligated to have a fully equipped office up and 
running in Riyadh within the next few weeks. This clause had ap- 
parently gone unnoticed for over a month. Our agreement with 
Treasury further stipulated that all equipment had to be manufac- 
tured either in the United States or in Saudi Arabia. Since Saudi 
Arabia did not have factories for producing such items, everything 
had to be sent from the States. To our chagrin, we discovered that 
long lines of tankers were queued up, waiting to get into ports on the 
Arabian Peninsula. It could take many months to get a shipment of 
supplies into the kingdom. 

MAIN was not about to lose such a valuable contract over a couple 
of rooms of office furniture. At a conference of all the partners in- 
volved, we brainstormed for several hours. The solution we settled 
on was to charter a Boeing 747, fill it with supplies from Boston-area 
stores, and send it off to Saudi Arabia. I remember thinking that it 
would be fitting if the plane were owned by United Airlines and 
commanded by a certain pilot whose wife had played such a critical 
role in bringing the House of Saud around. 



The deal between the United States and Saudi Arabia transformed 
the kingdom practically overnight. The goats were replaced by two 

Pimping, and Financing Osama bin Laden 95 



hundred bright yellow American trash compactor trucks, provided 
under a $200 million contract with Waste Management, Inc. 2 In 
similar fashion, even' sector of the Saudi economy was modernized, 
from agriculture and energy to education and communications. As 
Thomas Lippman observed in 2003: 

Americans have reshaped a vast, bleak landscape of 
nomads' tents and farmers' mud huts in their own image, 
right down to Starbucks on the corner and the wheelchair- 
accessible ramps in the newest public buildings. Saudi 
Arabia today is a country of expressways, computers, 
air-conditioned malls filled with the same glossy shops 
found in prosperous American suburbs, elegant hotels, 
fast-food restaurants, satellite television, up-to-date 
hospitals, high-rise office towers, and amusement parks 
featuring whirling rides. 3 

The plans we conceived in 1974 set a standard for future negoti- 
ations with oil-rich countries. In a way, SAMA/JECOR was the next 
plateau after the one Kermit Roosevelt had established in Iran. It 
introduced an innovative level of sophistication to the arsenal of 
political-economic weapons used by a new breed of soldiers for 
global empire. 

The Saudi Arabia Money-laundering Affair and the Joint Com- 
mission also set new precedents for international jurisprudence. This 
was very evident in the case of Idi Amin. When the notorious Ugan- 
dan dictator went into exile in 1979, he was given asylum in Saudi 
Arabia. Although he was considered a murderous despot responsible 
for the deaths of between one hundred thousand and three hundred 
thousand people, he retired to a life of luxury, complete with cars 
and domestic servants provided by the House of Saud. The United 
States quietly objected but refused to press the issue for fear of un- 
dermining its arrangement with the Saudis. Amin whiled away his 
last years fishing and taking strolls on the beach. In 2003, he died in 
Jiddah, succumbing to kidney failure at the age of eighty. 4 

More subtle and ultimately much more damaging was the role 
Saudi Arabia was allowed to play in financing international terror- 
ism. The United States made no secret of its desire to have the House 
of Saud bankroll Osama bin Laden's Afghan war against the Soviet 

96 Part II; 1971-1975 



Union during the 1980s, and Riyadh and Washington together con- 
tributed an estimated S'3.5 billion to the mujahideen. 5 However, 
U.S. and Saudi participation went far beyond this. 

In late 2003, U.S. News & World Report conducted an exhaustive 
study titled, "The Saudi Connection." The magazine reviewed thou- 
sands of pages of court records, U.S. and foreign intelligence reports, 
and other documents, and interviewed dozens of government offi- 
cials and experts on terrorism and the Middle East. Its findings 
include the following: 

The evidence was indisputable: Saudi Arabia, America's 
longtime ally and the world's largest oil producer, had 
somehow become, as a senior Treasury Department 
official put it, "the epicenter" of terrorist financing... 

Starting in the late 1980s — after the dual shocks of 
the Iranian revolution and the Soviet war in Afghanistan 
— Saudi Arabia's quasi-official charities became the pri- 
mary source of funds for the fast-growing jihad movement. 
In some 20 countries the money was used to run para- 
military training camps, purchase weapons, and recruit 
new members... 

Saudi largess encouraged U.S. officials to look the 
other way, some veteran intelligence officers say. Billions 
of dollars in contracts, grants, and salaries have gone to a 
broad range of former U.S. officials who had dealt with 
the Saudis: ambassadors, CIA station chiefs, even cabinet 
secretaries... 

Electronic intercepts of conversations implicated 
members of the royal family in backing not only 
Al Qaeda but also other terrorist groups. 6 

After the 2001 attacks on the World Trade Center and the Penta- 
gon, more evidence emerged about the covert relationships between 
Washington and Riyadh. In October 2003, Vanity Fair magazine 
disclosed information that had not previously been made public, in 
an in-depth report titled, "Saving the Saudis." The story that emerged 
about the relationship between the Bush family, the House of Saud, 
and the bin Laden family did not surprise me. I knew that those re- 
lationships went back at least to the time of the Saudi Arabian 

Pimping, and Financing Osama bin Laden y7 



Money-laundering Affair, which began in 1974, and to George H. W. 
Bush's terms as U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations (from 1971 
to 1973) and then as head of the CIA (from 1976 to 1977). What sur- 
prised me was the fact that the truth had finally made the press. 
Vanity Fair concluded: 

The Bush family and the House of Saud, the two most 
powerful dynasties in the world, have had close personal, 
business, and political ties for more than 20 years... 

In the private sector, the Saudis supported Harken 
Energy, a struggling oil company in which George W. 
Bush was an investor. Most recently, former president 
George H. W. Bush and his longtime ally, former Secre- 
tary of State James A. Baker III, have appeared before 
Saudis at fundraisers for the Carlyle Group, arguably the 
biggest private equity firm in the world. Today, former 
president Bush continues to serve as a senior adviser to 
the firm, whose investors allegedly include a Saudi 
accused of ties to terrorist support groups... 

Just days after 9/11, wealthy Saudi Arabians, includ- 
ing members of the bin Laden family, were whisked out 
of the U.S. on private jets. No one will admit to clearing 
the flights, and the passengers weren't questioned. Did 
the Bush family's long relationship with the Saudis help 
make it happen? 7 



98 Part II: 1971-1975 



PART III: 1975-1981 



CHAPTER 17 



Panama Canal Negotiations 
and Graham Greene 



Saudi Arabia made many careers. Mine was already well on the way, 
but my successes in the desert kingdom certainly opened new 
doors for me. By 1977, 1 had built a small empire that included a staff 
of around twenty professionals headquartered in our Boston office, 
and a stable of consultants from MAIN's other departments and of- 
fices scattered across the globe. I had become the youngest partner 
in the firm's hundred-year history. In addition to my title of Chief 
Economist, I was named manager of Economics and Regional Plan- 
ning. I was lecturing at Harvard and other venues, and newspapers 
were soliciting articles from me about current events. 1 I owned a 
sailing yacht that was docked in Boston Harbor next to the historic 
battleship Constitution, "Old Ironsides," renowned for subduing the 
Barbary pirates not long after the Revolutionary- War. I was being 
paid an excellent salary and I had equity that promised to elevate me 
to the rarifled heights of millionaire well before I turned forty. True, 
my marriage had fallen apart, but I was spending time with beauti- 
ful and fascinating women on several continents. 

Bruno came up with an idea for an innovative approach to fore- 
casting: an econometric model based on the writings of a turn-of- 
the-century Russian mathematician. The model involved assigning 
subjective probabilities to predictions that certain specific sectors of 
an economy would grow. It seemed an ideal tool to justify the in- 
flated rates of increase we liked to show in order to obtain large 
loans, and Bruno asked me to see what I could do with the concept. 



101 



I brought a young MIT mathematician, Dr. Nadipuram Prasad, 
into my department and gave him a budget. Within six months he 
developed the Markov method for econometric modeling. Together 
we hammered out a series of technical papers that presented 
Markov as a revolutionary method for forecasting the impact of in- 
frastructure investment on economic development. 

It was exactly what we wanted: a tool that scientifically "proved" 
we were doing countries a favor by helping them incur debts they 
would never be able to pay off. In addition, only a highly skilled econo- 
metrician with lots of time and money could possibly comprehend 
the intricacies of Markov or question its conclusions. The papers were 
published by several prestigious organizations, and we formally pre- 
sented them at conferences and universities in a number of countries. 
The papers — and we — became famous throughout the industry. 2 

Omar Torrijos and I honored our secret agreement. I made sure 
our studies were honest and that our recommendations took into ac- 
count the poor. Although I heard grumbling that my forecasts in 
Panama were not up to their usual inflated standards, and even that 
they smacked of socialism, the fact was that MAIN kept winning 
contracts from the Torrijos government. These contracts included a 
first —to provide innovative master plans that involved agriculture 
along with the more traditional infrastructure sectors. I also watched 
from the sidelines as Torrijos and Jimmy Carter set out to renegoti- 
ate the Canal Treaty. 

The Canal negotiations generated great interest and great pas- 
sions around the world. People everywhere waited to see whether 
the United States would do what most of the rest of the world be- 
lieved was the right thing — allow the Panamanians to take control 
— or would instead try to reestablish our global version of Manifest 
Destiny, which had been shaken by our Vietnam debacle. For many, 
it appeared that a reasonable and compassionate man had been 
elected to the U.S. presidency at just the right time. However, the 
conservative bastions of Washington and the pulpits of the religious 
right rang with indignation. How could we give up this bulwark of 
national defense, this symbol of U.S. ingenuity, this ribbon of water 
that tied South America's fortunes to the whims of U.S. commercial 
interests? 

During my trips to Panama, I became accustomed to staying at 



102 Part III: 1975-1981 



the Hotel Continental. However, on my fifth visit I moved across the 
street to the Hotel Panama because the Continental was undergoing 
renovations and the construction was very noisy. At first, I resented 
the inconvenience — the Continental had been my home away from 
home. But now the expansive lobby where I sat, with its rattan chairs 
and paddle-bladed wooden ceiling fans, w T as growing on me. It could 
have been the set of Casablanca, and I fantasized that Humphrey 
Bogart might stroll in at any moment. I set down the copy of the 
New York Review of Books, in which I had just finished reading a 
Graham Greene article about Panama, and stared up at those fans, 
recalling an evening almost two years earlier. 

"Ford is a weak president who won't be reelected," Omar Torrijos 
predicted in 1975. He was speaking to a group of influential Pana- 
manians. I was one of the few foreigners who had been invited to the 
elegant old club with its whirring ceiling fans. "That's the reason I 
decided to accelerate this Canal issue. It's a good time to launch an 
all-out political battle to win it back." 

The speech inspired me. I returned to my hotel room and scratched 
out a letter that I eventually mailed to the Boston Globe. Back in 
Boston, an editor responded by calling me at my office to request 
that I write an Op-Ed piece. "Colonialism in Panama Has No Place 
in 1975" took up nearly half the page opposite the editorials in the 
September 19, 1975, edition. 

The article cited three specific reasons for transferring the Canal 
to Panama. First, "the present situation is unjust — a good reason for 
any decision." Second, "the existing treaty creates far graver security 
risks than would result from turning more control over to the Pana- 
manians." I referenced a study conducted by the Interoceanic Canal 
Commission, which concluded that "traffic could be halted for two 
years by a bomb planted — conceivably by one man — in the side 
of Gatun Dam," a point General Torrijos himself had publicly em- 
phasized. And third, "the present situation is creating serious prob- 
lems for already-troubled United States-Latin American relations." 
I ended with the following: 

The best way of assuring the continued and efficient op- 
eration of the Canal is to help Panamanians gain control 
over and responsibility for it. In so doing, we could take 



Panama Canal Negotiations and Graham Greene 103 



pride in initiating an action that would reaffirm commit- 
ments to the cause of self-determination to which we 
pledged ourselves 200 years ago... 

Colonialism was in vogue at the turn of the century 
(early 1900s) as it had been in 1775. Perhaps ratification 
of such a treaty can be understood in the context of those 
times. Today it is without justification. Colonialism has 
no place in 1975. We, celebrating our bicentennial, 
should realize this, and act accordingly. 3 

Writing that piece was a bold move on my part, especially since I 
had recently been made a partner at MAIN. Partners were expected 
to avoid the press and certainly to refrain from publishing political 
diatribes on the editorial pages of New England's most prestigious 
newspaper. I received through interoffice mail a pile of nasty, mostly 
anonymous notes stapled to copies of the article. I was certain that 
I recognized the handwriting on one as that of Charlie Illingworth. 
My first project manager had been at MAIN for over ten years (com- 
pared to less than five for me) and was not yet a partner. A fierce 
skull and crossbones figured prominently on the note, and its mes- 
sage was simple: "Is this Commie really a partner in our firm?" 

Bruno summoned me to his office and said, "You'll get loads of 
grief over thi- MAIN's a pretty conservative place. But I want you to 
know I think you're smart. Torrijos will love it; I do hope you're 
sending him a copy. Good. Well, these jokers here in this office, the 
ones who think Torrijos is a Socialist, really won't give a damn as 
long as the work flows in." 

Bruno had been right — as usual. Now it was 1977, Carter was in 
the White House, and serious Canal negotiations were under way. 
Many of MAIN's competitors had taken the wrong side and had 
been turned out of Panama, but our work had multiplied. And I was 
sitting in the lobby of the Hotel Panama, having just finished read- 
ing an article by Graham Greene in the New York Review of Books. 

The article, "The Country with Five Frontiers," was a gutsy piece 
that included a discussion of corruption among senior officers in 
Panama's National Guard, The author pointed out that the general 
himself admitted to giving many of his staff special privileges, such 
as superior housing, because "If I don't pay them, the CIA will." The 
clear implication was that the U.S. intelligence community was 

104 Part III: 1975-1981 



determined to undermine the wishes of President Carter and, if nec- 
essary, would bribe Panama's military chiefs into sabotaging the 
treaty negotiations. 4 I could not help but wonder if the jackals had 
begun to circle Torrijos. 

I had seen a photograph in the "People" section of TIME or 
Newsweek of Torrijos and Greene sitting together; the caption indi- 
cated that the writer was a special guest who had become a good 
friend. I wondered how the general felt about this novelist, whom he 
apparently trusted, writing such a critique. 

Graham Greene's article raised another question, one that related 
to that day in 1972 when I had sat across a coffee table from Torrijos. 
At the time, I had assumed that Torrijos knew the foreign aid game 
was there to make him rich while shackling his country with debt. I 
had been sure he knew that the process was based on the assump- 
tion that men in power are corruptible, and that his decision not to 
seek personal benefit — but rather to use foreign aid to truly help his 
people — would be seen as a threat that might eventually topple the 
entire system. The world was watching this man; his actions had 
ramifications that reached far beyond Panama and would therefore 
not be taken lightly. 

I had wondered how the corporatocracy would react if loans 
made to Panama helped the poor without contributing to impossible 
debts. Now I wondered whether Torrijos regretted the deal he and I 
had struck that day— and I wasn't quite sure how I felt about those 
deals myself. I had stepped back from my EHM role. I had played 
his game instead of mine, accepting his insistence on honesty in ex- 
change for more contracts. In purely economic terms, it had been a 
wise business decision for MAIN. Nonetheless, it had been incon- 
sistent with what Claudine had instilled in me; it was not advancing 
the global empire. Had it now unleashed the jackals? 

I recalled thinking, when I left Torrijos's bungalow that day, that 
Latin American history is littered with dead heroes. A system based 
on corrupting public figures does not take kindly to public figures 
who refuse to be corrupted. 

Then I thought my eyes were playing tricks. A familiar figure was 
walking slowly across the lobby. At first, I was so confused that I be- 
lieved it was Humphrey Bogart, but Bogart was long deceased. Then 
I recognized the man ambling past me as one of the great figures in 
modern English literature, author of The Pride and the Glory, The 

Panama Canal Negotiations and Graham Greene 105 



Comedians, Our Man in Havana, and of the article I had just set 
down on the table next to me. Graham Greene hesitated a moment, 
peered around, and headed for the coffee shop. 

I was tempted to call out or to run after him, but I stopped my- 
self. An inner voice said he needed his privacy; another warned that 
he would shun me. I picked up the New York Review of Books and 
was surprised a moment later to discover that I was standing in the 
doorway to the coffee shop. 

I had breakfasted earlier that morning, and the maitre d' gave me 
an odd look. I glanced around. Graham Greene sat alone at a table 
near the wall. I pointed to the table beside him. 

"Over there," I told the maitre d'. "Can I sit there for another 
breakfast?" 

I was always a good tipper; the maitre d' smiled knowingly and 
led me to the table. 

The novelist was absorbed in his newspaper. I ordered coffee and 
a croissant with honey. I wanted to discover Greene's thoughts about 
Panama, Torrijos, and the Canal affair, but had no idea how to initi- 
ate such a conversation. Then he looked up to take a sip from 
his glass. 

"Excuse me," I said. 

He glared at me — or so it seemed. "Yes?" 

"I hate to intrude. But you are Graham Greene, aren't you?" 

"Why, yes indeed." He smiled warmly. "Most people in Panama 
don't recognize me." 

I gushed that he was my favorite novelist, and then gave him a 
brief life history, including my work at MAIN and my meetings with 
Torrijos. He asked if I was the consultant who had written an article 
about the United States getting out of Panama. "In the Boston Globe, 
if I recall correctly." 

I was flabbergasted. 

"A courageous thing to do, given your position," he said. "Won't 
you join me?" 

I moved to his table and sat there with him for what must have 
been an hour and a half. I realized as we chatted how very close to 
Torrijos he had grown. He spoke of the general at times like a father 
speaking about his son. 



106 Part III: 1975-1981 



"The general," he said, "invited me to write a book about his coun- 
try. I'm doing just that. This one will be nonfiction — something a bit 
off the line for me." 

I asked him why he usually wrote novels instead of nonfiction. 

"Fiction is safer," he said. "Most of my subject matter is contro- 
versial. Vietnam. Haiti. The Mexican Revolution. A lot of publishers 
would be afraid to publish nonfiction about these matters." He 
pointed at the New York Review of Books, where it lay on the table I 
had vacated. "Words like those can cause a great deal of damage." 
Then he smiled. "Besides, I like to write fiction. It gives me much 
greater freedom." He looked at me intensely. "The important thing 
is to write about things that matter. Like your Globe article about 
the Canal." 

His admiration for Torrijos was obvious. It seemed that Panama's 
head of state could impress a novelist every bit as much as he im- 
pressed the poor and dispossessed. Equally obvious was Greene's 
concern for his friend's life. 

"It's a huge endeavor," he exclaimed, "taking on the Giant of the 
North." He shook his head sadly. "I fear for his safety." 

Then it was time for him to leave. 

"Must catch a flight to France," he said, rising slowly and shaking 
my hand. He peered into my eyes. "Why don't you write a book?" He 
gave me an encouraging nod. "It's in you. But remember, make it 
about things that matter." He turned and walked away. Then he 
stopped and came back a few steps into the restaurant. 

"Don't worry," he said. "The general will prevail. He'll get the 
Canal back." 

Torrijos did get it back. In that same year, 1977, he successfully 
negotiated new treaties with President Carter that transferred the 
Canal Zone and the Canal itself over to Panamanian control. Then 
the White House had to convince the U.S. Congress to ratify it. A 
long and arduous battle ensued. In the final tally, the Canal Treat}' 
was ratified by a single vote. Conservatives swore revenge. 

When Graham Greene's nonfiction book Getting to Know the Gen- 
eral came out many years later, it was dedicated, "To the friends of my 
friend, Omar Torrijos, in Nicaragua, El Salvador, and Panama." 5 



Panama Canal Negotiations and Graham Greene 107 



CHAPTER 18 



Iran's King of Kings 



Between 1975 and 1978, 1 frequently visited Iran. Sometimes I com- 
muted between Latin America or Indonesia and Tehran. The Shah 
of Shahs (literally, "King of Kings," his official title) presented a com- 
pletely different situation from that in the other countries where we 
worked. 

Iran was oil rich and, like Saudi Arabia, it did not need to incur 
debt in order to finance its ambitious list of projects. However, Iran 
differed significantly from Saudi Arabia in that its large population, 
while predominantly Middle Eastern and Muslim, was not Arabic. 
In addition, the country had a history of political turmoil — both in- 
ternally and in its relationships with its neighbors. Therefore, we 
took a different approach: Washington and the business community 
joined forces to turn the shah into a symbol of progress. 

We launched an immense effort to show the world what a strong, 
democratic friend of U.S. corporate and political interests could ac- 
complish. Never mind his obviously undemocratic title or the less 
obvious fact of the CIA-orchestrated coup against his democratically 
elected premier; Washington and its European partners were de- 
termined to present the shah's government as an alternative to those 
in Iraq, Libya, China, Korea, and other nations where a powerful 
undercurrent of anti-Americanism was surfacing. 

To all appearances, the shah was a progressive friend of the under- 
privileged. In 1962, he ordered large private landholdings broken up 
and turned over to peasant owners. The following year, he inaugurated 



108 



his White Revolution, which involved an extensive agenda for socio- 
economic reforms. The power of OPEC grew during the 1970s, and 
the shah became an increasingly influential world leader. At the 
same time, Iran developed one of the most powerful military forces 
in the Muslim Middle East. 1 

MAIN was involved in projects that covered most of the country, 
from tourist areas along the Caspian Sea in the north to secret mil- 
itary installations overlooking the Straits of Hormuz in the south. 
Once again, the focus of our work was to forecast regional develop- 
ment potentials and then to design electrical generating, transmis- 
sion, and distribution systems that would provide the all-important 
energy required to fuel the industrial and commercial growth that 
would realize these forecasts. 

I visited most of the major regions of Iran at one time or another. 
I followed the old caravan trail through the desert mountains, from 
Kirman to Bandar Abbas, and I roamed the ruins of Persepolis, the 
legendary palace of ancient kings and one of the wonders of the clas- 
sical world. I toured the country's most famous and spectacular sites: 
Shiraz, Isfahan, and the magnificent tent city near Persepolis where 
the shah had been crowned. In the process, I developed a genuine 
love for this land and its complex people. 

On the surface, Iran seemed to be a model example of Christian- 
Muslim cooperation. However, I soon learned that tranquil appear- 
ances may mask deep resentment. 

Late one evening in 1977, I returned to my hotel room to find a 
note shoved under my door. I was shocked to discover that it was 
signed by a man named Yamin. I had never met him, but he had 
been described to me during a government briefing as a famous and 
most subversive radical. In beautifully crafted English script, the 
note invited me to meet him at a designated restaurant. However, 
there was a warning: I was to come only if I was interested in ex- 
ploring a side of Iran that most people "in my position" never saw. I 
wondered whether Yamin knew what my true position was. I real- 
ized that I was taking a big risk; however, I could not resist the 
temptation to meet this enigmatic figure. 

My taxi dropped me off in front of a tiny gate in a high wall — so 
high that I could not see the building behind it. A beautiful Iranian 
woman wearing a long black gown ushered me in and led me down 
a corridor illuminated by ornate oil lamps hanging from a low ceiling. 

Iran's King of Kings 109 



At the end of this corridor, we entered a room that dazzled like the 
interior of a diamond, blinding me with its radiance. When my eyes 
finally adjusted, I saw that the walls were inlaid with semiprecious 
stones and mother-of-pearl. The restaurant was lighted by tall white 
candles protruding from intricately sculpted bronze chandeliers. 

A tall man with long black hair, wearing a tailored navy blue suit, 
approached and shook my hand. He introduced himself as Yamin, in 
an accent that suggested he was an Iranian who had been educated 
in the British school system, and I was immediately struck by how 
little he looked like a subversive radical. He directed me past several 
tables where couples sat quietly eating, to a very private alcove; he 
assured me we could talk in complete confidentiality. I had the dis- 
tinct impression that this restaurant catered to secret rendezvous. 
Ours, quite possibly, was the only non-amorous one that night. 

Yamin was very cordial. During our discussion, it became obvious 
that he thought of me merely as an economic consultant, not as 
someone with ulterior motives. He explained that he had singled me 
out because he knew I had been a Peace Corps volunteer and be- 
cause he had been told that I took every possible opportunity to get 
to know his country and to mix with its people. 

"You are very young compared to most in your profession," he 
said. "You have a genuine interest in our history and our current 
problems. You represent our hope." 

This, as well as the setting, his appearance, and the presence of so 
many others in the restaurant, gave me a certain degree of comfort. 
I had become accustomed to people befriending me, like Rasy in 
Java and Fidel in Panama, and I accepted it as a compliment and an 
opportunity. I knew that I stood out from other Americans because 
I was in fact infatuated with the places 1 visited. I have found that 
people warm to you very quickly if you open your eyes, ears, and 
heart to their culture. 

Yamin asked if I knew about the Flowering Desert project. 2 "The 
shah believes that our deserts were once fertile plains and lush 
forests. At least, that's what he claims. During Alexander the Great's 
reign, according to this theory, vast armies swept across these lands, 
traveling with millions of goats and sheep. The animals ate all the 
grass and other vegetation. The disappearance of these plants caused 
a drought, and eventually the entire region became a desert. Now all 
we have to do, or so the shah says, is plant millions upon millions of 

110 Part III: 1975-1981 



trees. After that — presto — the rains will return and the desert will 
bloom again. Of course, in the process we will have to spend hun- 
dreds of millions of dollars." He smiled condescendingly. "Companies 
like yours will reap huge profits." 

"I take it you don't believe in this theory." 

"The desert is a symbol. Turning it green is about much more 
than agriculture." 

Several waiters descended upon us with trays of beautifully pre- 
sented Iranian food. Asking my permission first, Yamin proceeded to 
select an assortment from the various trays. Then he turned back 
to me. 

"A question for you, Mr. Perkins, if I might be so bold. What de- 
stroyed the cultures of your own native peoples, the Indians?" 

I responded that I felt there had been many factors, including 
greed and superior weapons. 

"Yes. True. All of that. But more than anything else, did it not 
come down to a destruction of the environment?" He went on to ex- 
plain how once forests and animals such as the buffalo are destroyed, 
and once people are moved onto reservations, the very foundations 
of cultures collapse. 

'You see, it is the same here," he said. "The desert is our environ- 
ment. The Flowering Desert project threatens nothing less than the 
destruction of our entire fabric. How can we allow this to happen?" 

I told him that it was my understanding that the whole idea be- 
hind the project came from his people. He responded with a cynical 
laugh, saying that the idea was planted in the shah's mind by my own 
United States government, and that the shah was just a puppet of 
that government. 

"A true Persian would never permit such a thing," Yamin said. 
Then he launched into a long dissertation about the relationship be- 
tween his people — the Bedouins — and the desert. He emphasized 
the fact that many urbanized Iranians take their vacations in the 
desert. They set up tents large enough for the entire family and 
spend a week or more living in them. 

"We — my people — are part of the desert. The people the shah 
claims to rule with that iron hand of his are not just of 'the desert. We 
are the desert." 

After that, he told me stories about his personal experiences in 
the desert. When the evening was over, he escorted me back to the 

Iran's King of Kings, 111 



tiny door in the large wall. My taxi was waiting in the street outside. 
Yamin shook my hand and expressed his appreciation for the time I 
had spent with him. He again mentioned my young age and my 
openness, and the fact that my occupying such a position gave him 
hope for the future. 

"I am so glad to have had this time with a man like you." He con- 
tinued to hold my hand in his. "I would request of you only one more 
favor. I do not ask this lightly. I do it only because, after our time 
together tonight, I know it will be meaningful to you. You'll gain a 
great deal from it." 

" What is it I can do for you?" 

"I would like to introduce you to a dear friend of mine, a man who 
can tell you a great deal about our King of Kings. He may shock you, 
but I assure you that meeting him will be well worth your time." 



112 Part III: 1975-1981 



CHAPTER 19 

Confessions of a Tortured Man 



Several days later, Yamin drove me out of Tehran, through a dusty 
and impoverished shantytown, along an old camel trail, and out 
to the edge of the desert. With the sun setting behind the city, 
he stopped his car at a cluster of tiny mud shacks surrounded by 
palm trees. 

"A very old oasis," he explained, "dating back centuries before 
Marco Polo." He preceded me to one of the shacks. "The man inside 
has a PhD from one of your most prestigious universities. For rea- 
sons that will soon be clear, he must remain nameless. You can call 
him Doc." 

He knocked on the wooden door, and there was a muffled re- 
sponse. Yamin pushed the door open and led me inside. The tiny 
room was windowless and lit only by an oil lamp on a low table in 
one corner. As my eyes adjusted, I saw that the dirt floor was covered 
with Persian carpets. Then the shadowy outline of a man began to 
emerge. He was seated in front of the lamp in a way that kept his 
features hidden. I could tell only that he was bundled in blankets 
and was wearing something around his head. He sat in a wheelchair, 
and other than the table, this was the only piece of furniture in the 
room. Yamin motioned for me to sit on a carpet. He went up and 
gently embraced the man, speaking a few words in his ear, then re- 
turned and sat at my side. 

"I've told you about Mr. Perkins," he said. "We're both honored to 
have this opportunity to visit with you, sir." 



113 



"Mr. Perkins. You are welcome." The voice, with barely any de- 
tectable accent, was low and hoarse. I found myself leaning forward 
into the small space between us as he said, "You see before you a 
broken man. I have not always been so. Once I was strong like you. 
I was a close and trusted adviser to the shah." There was a long pause. 
"The Shah of Shahs, King of Kings." His tone of voice sounded, I 
thought, more sad than angry. 

"I personally knew many of the world's leaders. Eisenhower, Nixon, 
de Gaulle. They trusted me to help lead this country into the capi- 
talist camp. The shah trusted me, and," he made a sound that could 
have been a cough, but which I took for a laugh, "I trusted the shah. 
I believed his rhetoric. I was convinced that Iran would lead the 
Muslim world into a new epoch, that Persia would fulfill its promise. 
It seemed our destiny — the shah's, mine, all of ours who carried out 
the mission we thought we had been born to fulfill." 

The lump of blankets moved; the wheelchair made a wheezing 
noise and turned slightly. I could see the outline of the man's face in 
profile, his shaggy beard, and — then it grabbed me — the flatness. 
He had no nose! I shuddered and stifled a gasp. 

"Not a pretty sight, would you say, ah, Mr. Perkins? Too bad you 
can't see it in full light. It is truly grotesque." Again there was the 
sound of choking laughter. "But as I'm sure you can appreciate, I must 
remain anonymous. Certainly, you could learn my identity if you 
tried, although you might find that I am dead. Officially, I no longer 
exist. Yet I trust you won't try. You and your family are better off not 
knowing who I am. The arm of the shah and SAVAK reaches far." 

The chair wheezed and returned to its original position. I felt a 
sense of relief, as though not seeing the profile somehow obliterated 
the violence that had been done. At the time, I did not know of this 
custom among some Islamic cultures. Individuals deemed to have 
brought dishonor or disgrace upon society or its leaders are pun- 
ished by having their noses cut off In this way, they are marked for 
life — as this man's face clearly demonstrated. 

"I'm sure, Mr. Perkins, you're wondering why we invited you here," 
Without waiting for my response, the man in the wheelchair con- 
tinued, "You see, this man who calls himself the King of Kings is in 
reality satanic. His father was deposed by your CIA with — I hate to 
say it — my help, because he was said to be a Nazi collaborator. And 
then there was the Mossadegh calamity. Today, our shah is on the 

114 Part III: 1975-1981 



route to surpassing Hitler in the realms of evil. He does this with the 
full knowledge and support of your government." 

"Why is that?" I asked. 

"Quite simple. He is your only real ally in the Middle East, and 
the industrial world rotates on the axle of oil that is the Middle East. 
Oh, you have Israel, of course, but that's actually a liability to you, 
not an asset. And no oil there. Your politicians must placate the Jew- 
ish vote, must get their money to finance campaigns. So you're stuck 
with Israel, I'm afraid. However, Iran is the key. Your oil companies 
— which carry even more power than the Jews — need us. You need 
our shah — or you think you do, just as you thought you needed 
South Vietnam's corrupt leaders." 

'Are you suggesting otherwise? Is Iran the equivalent to Vietnam?" 

"Potentially much worse. You see, this shah won't last much 
longer. The Muslim world hates him. Not just the Arabs, but Mus- 
lims everywhere — Indonesia, the United States, but mostly right 
here, his own Persian people." There was a thumping sound and I 
realized that he had struck the side of his chair. "He is evil! We 
Persians hate him." Then silence. I could hear only his heavy breath- 
ing, as though the exertion had exhausted him. 

"Doc is very close to the mullahs," Yamin said to me, his voice low 
and calm. "There is a huge undercurrent among the religious factions 
here and it pervades most of our country, except for a handful of 
people in the commercial classes who benefit from the shah's 
capitalism." 

"I don't doubt you," I said. "But I must say that during four visits 
here, I've seen nothing of it. Everyone I talk with seems to love the 
shah, to appreciate the economic upsurge." 

"You don't speak Farsi," Yamin observed. "You hear only what is 
told to you by those men who benefit the most. The ones who have 
been educated in the States or in England end up working for the 
shah. Doc here is an exception — now." 

He paused, seeming to ponder his next words. "It's the same with 
your press. They only talk with the few who are his kin, his circle. Of 
course, for the most part, your press is also controlled by oil. So they 
hear what they want to hear and write what their advertisers want 
to read." 

"Why are we telling you all this, Mr. Perkins?" Doc's voice was 
even more hoarse than before, as if the effort of speaking and the 

Confessions of a Tortured Man 115 



emotions were draining what little energy the man had mustered for 
this meeting. "Because we'd like to convince you to get out and to 
persuade your company to stay away from our country. We want 
to warn you that although you may think you'll make a great deal of 
money here, it's an illusion. This government will not last." Again, I 
heard the sound of his hand thudding against the chair. "And when 
it goes, the one that replaces it will have no sympathy for you and 
your kind." 

"You're saying we won't be paid?" 

Doc broke down in a fit of coughing. Yamin went to him and 
rubbed his back. When the coughing ended, he spoke to Doc in Farsi 
and then came back to his seat. 

"We must end this conversation," Yamin said to me. "In answer to 
your question: yes, you will not be paid. You'll do all that work> and 
when it comes time to collect your fees, the shah will be gone." 

During the drive back, I asked Yamin why he and Doc wanted to 
spare MAIN the financial disaster he had predicted. 

"We'd be happy to see yonr company go bankrupt. However, we'd 
rather see you leave Iran. Just one company like yours, walking away, 
could start a trend. That's what we're hoping. You see, we don't want 
a bloodbath here, but the shah must go, and we'll try anything that 
will make that easier. So we pray to Allah that you'll convince your 
Mr. Zambotti to get out while there is still time." 

"Why me?" 

"I knew during our dinner together, when we spoke of the Flow- 
ering Desert project, that you were open to the truth. I knew that our 
information about you was correct — you are a man between two 
worlds, a man in the middle." 

It made me wonder just how much he did know about me. 



116 Part III: 1975-1981 



CHAPTER 20 

The Fall of a King 



One evening in 1978, while I was sitting alone at the luxurious bar 
off the lobby of the Hotel Intercontinental in Tehran, I felt a tap on 
my shoulder. I turned to see a heavyset Iranian in a business suit. 

"John Perkins! You don't remember me?" 

The former soccer player had gained a lot of weight, but the voice 
was unmistakable. It was my old Middlebury friend Farhad, whom 
I had not seen in more than a decade. We embraced and sat down 
together. It quickly became obvious that he knew all about me and 
about my work. It was equally obvious that he did not intend to 
share much about his own work. 

"Let's get right to the point," he said as we ordered our second 
beers. "I'm flying to Rome tomorrow. My parents live there. I have a 
ticket for you on my flight. Things are falling apart here. You've got 
to get out." He handed me an airline ticket. I did not doubt him for 
a moment. 

In Rome, we dined with Farhad's parents. His father, the retired 
Iranian general who once stepped in front of a would-be assassin's 
bullet to save the shah's life, expressed disillusionment with his for- 
mer boss. He said that during the past few years the shah had showed 
his true colors, his arrogance and greed. The general blamed U.S. 
policy — particularly its backing of Israel, of corrupt leaders, and of 
despotic governments — for the hatred sweeping the Middle East, 
and he predicted that the shah would be gone within months. 

"You know," he said, "you sowed the seeds of this rebellion in the 



117 



early fifties, when you overthrew Mossadegh. You thought it very 
clever back then — as did I. But now it returns to haunt you — us." 1 

I was astounded by his pronouncements. I had heard something 
similar from Yamin and Doc, but coming from this man it took on 
new significance. By this time, everyone knew of the existence of a 
fundamentalist Islamic underground, but we had convinced our- 
selves that the shah was immensely popular among the majority of 
his people and was therefore politically invincible. The general, 
however, was adamant. 

"Mark my words," he said solemnly, "the shah's fall will be only the 
beginning. It's a preview of where the Muslim world is headed. Our 
rage has smoldered beneath the sands too long. Soon it will erupt." 

Over dinner, I heard a great deal about Ayatollah Ruhollah Kho- 
meini. Farhad and his father made it clear that they did not support 
his fanatical Shiism, but they were obviously impressed by the in- 
roads he had made against the shah. They told me that this cleric, 
whose given name translates to "inspired of God," was born into a 
family of dedicated Shiite scholars in a village near Tehran, in 1902. 

Khomeini had made it a point not to become involved in the 
Mossadegh-shah struggles of the early 1950s, but he actively op- 
posed the shah in the 1960s, criticizing the ruler so adamantly that 
he was banished to Turkey, then to the Shiite holy city of An Najaf in 
Iraq, where he became the acknowledged leader of the opposition. 
He sent out letters, articles, and tape-recorded messages urging Ira- 
nians to rise up, overthrow the shah, and create a clerical state. 

Two days after that dinner with Farhad and his parents, news 
came out of Iran of bombings and riots. Ayatollah Khomeini and the 
mullahs had begun the offensive that would soon give them control. 
After that, things happened fast. The rage Farhad's father had de- 
scribed exploded in a violent Islamic uprising. The shah fled his 
country for Egypt in January 1979, and then, diagnosed with cancer, 
headed for a New York Hospital. 

Followers of the Ayatollah Khomeini demanded his return. In 
November 1979, a militant Islamic mob seized the United States 
Embassy in Tehran and held fifty-two American hostages for the 
next 444 days. 2 President Carter attempted to negotiate the release 
of the hostages. When this failed, he authorized a military rescue 
mission, launched in April 1980. It was a disaster, and it turned out 



118 Part III: 1975-1981 



to be the hammer that would drive the final nail into Carter's presi- 
dential coffin. 

Tremendous pressure, exerted by U.S. commercial and political 
groups, forced the cancer-ridden shah to leave the United States. 
From the day he fled Tehran he had a difficult time finding sanctu- 
ary; all his former friends shunned him. However, General Torrijos 
exhibited his customary compassion and offered the shah asylum in 
Panama, despite a personal dislike of the shah's politics. The shah 
arrived and received sanctuary at the very same resort where the 
new Panama Canal Treaty had so recently been negotiated. 

The mullahs demanded the shah's return in exchange for the 
hostages held in the U.S. Embassy. Those in Washington who had 
opposed the Canal Treaty accused Torrijos of corruption and collu- 
sion with the shah, and of endangering the lives of U.S. citizens. They 
too demanded that the shah be turned over to Ayatollah Khomeini. 
Ironically, until only a few weeks earlier, many of these same people 
had been the shah's staunchest supporters. The once-proud King of 
Kings eventually returned to Egypt, where he died of cancer. 

Doc's prediction came true. MAIN lost millions of dollars in Iran, 
as did many of our competitors. Carter lost his bid for reelection. 
The Reagan-Bush administration marched into Washington with 
promises to free the hostages, to bring down the mullahs, to return 
democracy to Iran, and to set straight the Panama Canal situation. 

For me, the lessons were irrefutable. Iran illustrated beyond any 
doubt that the United States was a nation laboring to deny the truth 
of our role in the world. It seemed incomprehensible that we could 
have been so misinformed about the shah and the tide of hatred that 
had surged against him. Even those of us in companies like MAIN, 
which had offices and personnel in the country, had not known. I felt 
certain that the NSA and the CIA must have seen what had been so 
obvious to Torrijos even as far back as my meeting with him in 1972, 
but that our own intelligence community had intentionally encour- 
aged us all to close our eyes. 



The Fall of a King 119 



CHAPTER 21 



Colombia: Keystone of Latin America 



While Saudi Arabia, Iran, and Panama offered fascinating and dis- 
turbing studies, they also stood out as exceptions to the rule. Due to 
vast oil deposits in the first two and the Canal in the third, they did 
not fit the norm. Colombia's situation was more typical, and MAIN 
was the designer and lead engineering firm on a huge hydroelectric 
project there. 

A Colombian college professor writing a book on the history of 
Pan-American relations once told me that Teddy Roosevelt had ap- 
preciated the significance of his country. Pointing at a map, the U.S. 
president and former Rough Rider reportedly described Colombia 
as "the keystone to the arch of South America." I have never verified 
that story; however, it is certainly true that on a map Colombia, 
poised at the top of the continent, appears to hold the rest of the 
continent together. It connects all the southern countries to the Isth- 
mus of Panama and therefore to both Central and North America. 

Whether Roosevelt actually described Colombia in those terms or 
not, he was only one of many presidents who understood its pivotal 
position. For nearly two centuries, the United States has viewed 
Colombia as a keystone — or perhaps more accurately, as a portal 
into the southern hemisphere for both business and politics. 

The country also is endowed with great natural beauty: spectac- 
ular palm-lined beaches on both the Atlantic and Pacific coasts, ma- 
jestic mountains, pampas that rival the Great Plains of the North 
American Midwest, and vast rain forests rich in biodiversity. The 



120 



people, too, have a special quality, combining the physical, cultural, 
and artistic traits of diverse ethnic backgrounds ranging from the local 
Taironas to imports from Africa, Asia, Europe, and the Middle East. 

Historically, Colombia has played a crucial role in Latin Ameri- 
can history and culture. During the colonial period, Colombia was 
the seat of the viceroy for all Spanish territories north of Peru and 
south of Costa Rica. The great fleets of gold galleons set sail from its 
coastal city of Cartagena to transport priceless treasures from as far 
south as Chile and Argentina to ports in Spain. Many of the critical 
actions in the wars for independence occurred in Colombia; for ex- 
ample, forces under Simon Bolivar were victorious over Spanish roy- 
alists at the pivotal Battle of Boyaca, in 1819. 

In modern times, Colombia has had a reputation for producing 
some of Latin America's most brilliant writers, artists, philosophers, and 
other intellectuals, as well as fiscally responsible and relatively dem- 
ocratic governments. It became the model for President Kennedy's 
nation-building programs throughout Latin America. Unlike Guate- 
mala, its government was not tarnished with the reputation of being 
a CIA creation, and unlike Nicaragua, the government was an elected 
one, which presented an alternative to both right-wing dictators and 
Communists. Finally, unlike so many other countries, including 
powerful Brazil and Argentina, Colombia did not mistrust the United 
States. The image of Colombia as a reliable ally has continued, de- 
spite the blemish of its drug cartels. 1 

The glories of Colombia's history, however, are counterbalanced 
by hatred and violence. The seat of the Spanish viceroy was also home 
to the Inquisition. Magnificent forts, haciendas, and cities were con- 
structed over the bones of Indian and African slaves. The treasures 
carried on the gold galleons, sacred objects and masterpieces of art 
that had been melted down for easy transport, were ripped from the 
hearts of ancient peoples. The proud cultures themselves were laid 
to waste by conquistador swords and diseases. More recently, a con- 
troversial presidential election in 1945 resulted in a deep division be- 
tween political parties and led to La Violencia (1948-1957), during 
which more than two hundred thousand people died. 

Despite the conflicts and ironies, both Washington and Wall 
Street historically have viewed Colombia as an essential factor in 
promoting Pan-American political and commercial interests. This is 
due to several factors, in addition to Colombia's critical geographic 



Columbia: Keystone of Latin America 121 



location, including the perception that leaders throughout the hemi- 
sphere look to Bogota for inspiration and guidance, and the fact that 
the country is both a source of many products purchased in the 
United States — coffee, bananas, textiles, emeralds, flowers, oil, and 
cocaine — and a market for our goods and services. 

One of the most important sendees we sold to Colombia during 
the late twentieth century was engineering and construction ex- 
pertise. Colombia was typical of many places where I worked. It was 
relatively easy to demonstrate that the country could assume vast 
amounts of debt and then repay these debts from the benefits real- 
ized both from the projects themselves and from the country's nat- 
ural resources. Thus, huge investments in electrical power grids, 
highways, and telecommunications would help Colombia open up 
its vast gas and oil resources and its largely undeveloped Amazonian 
territories; these projects, in turn, would generate the income nec- 
essary to pay off the loans, plus interest. 

That was the theory. However, the reality, consistent with our 
true intent around the world, was to subjugate Bogota, to further the 
global empire. My job, as it had been in so many places, was to pre- 
sent the case for exceedingly large loans. Colombia did not have the 
benefit of a Torrijos; therefore, I felt I had no choice but to develop 
inflated economic and electric load forecasts. 

With the exception of the occasional bouts of guilt over my job, 
Colombia became a personal refuge for me. Ann and I had spent a 
couple of months there in the early 1970s, and had even made a down 
payment on a small coffee farm located in the mountains along the 
Caribbean coast. I think our time together during that period came 
as close as anything could to healing the wounds we had inflicted on 
each other over the preceding years. Ultimately, however, the wounds 
went too deep, and it was not until after our marriage fell apart that 
I became truly acquainted with the country. 

During the 1970s, MAIN had been awarded a number of con- 
tracts to develop various infrastructure projects, including a network 
of hydroelectric facilities and the distribution systems to transport 
the electricity from deep in the jungle to cities high in the moun- 
tains. I was given an office in the coastal city of Barranquilla, and it 
was there, in 1977, that I met a beautiful Colombian woman who 
would become a powerful agent of change in my life. 



122 Part III: 1975-1981 



Paula had long blond hair and striking green eyes — not what 
most foreigners expect in a Colombian. Her mother and father had 
emigrated from northern Italy, and in keeping with her heritage, she 
became a fashion designer. She went a step further, however, and built 
a small factory where her creations were transformed into clothes, 
which she then sold at upscale boutiques throughout the country, as 
well as in Panama and Venezuela. She was a deeply compassionate 
person who helped me get through some of the personal trauma of 
my broken marriage and begin dealing with some of my attitudes to- 
ward women, which had affected me so negatively. She also taught me 
a great deal about the consequences of the actions I took in my job. 

As I have said before, life is composed of a series of coincidences 
over which we have no control. For me, those included being raised 
as the son of a teacher at an all-male prep school in rural New Hamp- 
shire, meeting Ann and her Uncle Frank, the Vietnam War, and 
meeting Einar Greve. However, once we are presented with such co- 
incidences, we face choices. How we respond, the actions we take in 
the face of coincidences, makes all the difference. For example, ex- 
celling at that school, marrying Ann, entering the Peace Corps, and 
choosing to become an economic hit man -— all these decisions had 
brought me to my current place in life. 

Paula was another coincidence, and her influence would lead me 
to take actions that changed the course of my life. Until I met her, I 
had pretty much gone along with the system. I often found myself 
questioning what I was doing, sometimes feeling guilty about it, yet 
1 always discovered a way to rationalize staying in the system. Per- 
haps Paula just happened along at the right time. It is possible that 
I would have taken the plunge anyway, that my experiences in Saudi 
Arabia, Iran, and Panama would have nudged me into action. But 
I am certain that even as one woman, Claudine, had been instru- 
mental in persuading me to join the ranks of EHMs, another, Paula, 
was the catalyst I needed at that time. She convinced me to go deep 
inside myself and see that I would never be happy as long as I con- 
tinued in that role. 



Columbia: Keystone of Latin America 12.3 



CHAPTER 22 



American Republic versus 
Global Empire 



"I'll be frank," Paula said one day, while we were sitting in a coffee 
shop. "The Indians and all the farmers who live along the river you're 
damming hate you. Even people in the cities, who aren't directly af- 
fected, sympathize with the guerrillas who've been attacking your 
construction camp. Your government calls these people Communists, 
terrorists, and narcotics traffickers, but the truth is they're just people 
with families who live on lands your company is destroying." 

I had just told her about Manuel Torres. He was an engineer em- 
ployed by MAIN and one of the men recently attacked by guerrillas 
at our hydroelectric dam construction site. Manuel was a Colombian 
citizen who had a job because of a U.S. Department of State rule pro- 
hibiting us from sending U.S. citizens to that site. We referred to it as 
the Colombians are Expendable doctrine, and it symbolized an atti- 
tude I had grown to hate. My feelings toward such policies were 
making it increasingly difficult for me to live with myself. 

"According to Manuel, they fired AK-47s into the air and at his 
feet," I told Paula. "He sounded calm when he told me about it, but 
I know he was almost hysterical. They didn't shoot anyone. Just gave 
them that letter and sent them downriver in their boats." 

"My God," Paula exclaimed. "The poor man was terrified." 

"Of course he was." I told her that I had asked Manuel whether he 
thought they were FARC or M-19, referring to two of the most infa- 
mous Colombian guerrilla groups. 

"And?" 



124. 



"He said, neither. But he told me that he believes what they said 
in that letter." 

Paula picked up the newspaper I had brought and read the letter 
aloud. 

"'We, who work every day just to survive, swear on the blood of 
our ancestors that we will never allow dams across our rivers. We are 
simple Indians and mestizos, but we would rather die than stand by 
as our land is flooded. We warn our Colombian brothers: stop work- 
ing for the construction companies.'" She set the paper down. "What 
did you say to him?" 

I hesitated, but only for a moment. "I had no choice. I had to toe 
the company line. I asked him if he thought that sounds like a letter 
a farmer would write." 

She sat watching me, patiently. 

"He just shrugged." Our eyes met. "Oh, Paula, I detest myself for 
playing this role." 

"What did you do next?" she pressed. 

"I slammed my fist on the desk. I intimidated him. I asked him 
whether farmers with AK-47s made any sense to him. Then I asked 
if he knew T who invented the AK-47-" 

"Did he?" 

"Yes, but I could hardly hear his answer. 'A Russian,' he said. Of 
course, I assured him that he was right, that the inventor had been 
a Communist named Kalashnikov, a highly decorated officer in the 
Red Army. I brought him around to understand that the people who 
wrote that note were Communists." 

"Do you believe that?" she asked. 

Her question stopped me. How could I answer, honestly? I recalled 
Iran and the time Yamin described me as a man caught between two 
worlds, a man in the middle. In some ways, I wished I had been in that 
camp when the guerrillas attacked, or that I was one of the guerrillas. 
An odd feeling crept over me, a sort of jealousy for Yamin and Doc and 
the Colombian rebels. These were men with convictions. They had 
chosen real worlds, not a no-man's territory somewhere between. 

"I have a job to do," I said at last. 

She smiled gently. 

"I hate it," I continued. I thought about the men whose images 
had come to me so often over the years, Tom Paine and other Revo- 
lutionary War heroes, pirates and frontiersmen. They stood at the 

American Republic versus Global Empire 125 



edges, not in the middle. They had taken stands and lived with the 
consequences. "Every day I come to hate my job a little more/' 

She took my hand. "Your job?" 

Our eyes met and held. I understood the implication. "Myself." 

She squeezed my hand and nodded slowly. I felt an immediate 
sense of relief, just admitting it. 

"What will you do, John?" 

I had no answer. The relief turned into defensiveness. I stam- 
mered out the standard justifications: that I was trying to do good, 
that I was exploring ways to change the system from within, and — 
the old standby— that if I quit, someone even worse would fill my 
shoes. But I could see from the way she watched me that she was not 
buying it. Even worse, I knew that I was not buying it either. She had 
forced me to understand the essential truth: it was not my job, but 
me, that was to blame. 

"What about you?" I asked at last. "What do you believe?" 

She gave a little sigh and released my hand, asking, 'You trying to 
change the subject?" 

I nodded. 

"Okay," she agreed. "Under one condition. That we'll return to it 
another day." She picked up a spoon and appeared to examine it. "I 
know that some of the guerrillas have trained in Russia and China." 
She lowered the spoon into her cafe con leche, stirred, and then slowly 
licked the spoon. "What else can they do? They need to learn about 
modern weapons and how to fight the soldiers who've gone through 
your schools. Sometimes they sell cocaine in order to raise money for 
supplies. How else can they buy guns? They're up against terrible 
odds. Your World Bank doesn't help them defend themselves. In 
fact, it forces them into this position." She took a sip of coffee. "I be- 
lieve their cause is just. The electricity will help only a few, the wealth- 
iest Colombians, and thousands will die because the fish and water 
are poisoned, after you build that dam of yours." 

Hearing her speak so compassionately about the people who op- 
posed us — me — caused my flesh to crawl. I found myself clawing at 
my forearms. 

"How do you know so much about the guerrillas?" Even as I 
asked it, I had a sinking feeling, a premonition that I did not want to 
know the answer. 



126 Part III: 1975-1981 



"I went to school with some of them," she said. She hesitated, 
pushed her cup away. "My brother joined the movement." 

There it was. I felt absolutely deflated. I thought I knew all about 
her, but this... I had the fleeting image of a man coming home to find 
his wife in bed with another man. 

"How come you never told me?" 

''Seemed irrelevant. Why would I? It isn't something I brag 
about." She paused. T haven't seen him for two years. He has to be 
very careful." 

"How do you know he's alive?" 

"I don't, except recently the government put him on a wanted list. 
That's a good sign." 

I was fighting the urge to be judgmental or defensive. I hoped she 
could not discern my jealousy. "How did he become one of them?" 
I asked. 

Fortunately, she kept her eyes on the coffee cup. "Demonstrating 
outside the offices of an oil company— Occidental, I think. He was 
protesting drilling on indigenous lands, in the forests of a tribe facing 
extinction— him and a couple dozen of his friends. They were attacked 
by the army, beaten, and thrown into prison — for doing nothing 
illegal, mind you, just standing outside that building waving placards 
and singing." She glanced out a nearby window. 'They kept him in 
jail for nearly six months. He never did tell us what happened there, 
but when he came out he was a different person." 

It was the first of many similar conversations with Paula, and I 
now know that these discussions set the stage for what was to follow. 
My soul was torn apart, yet I was still ruled by my wallet and by 
those other weaknesses the NSA had identified when they profiled 
me a decade earlier, in 1968. By forcing me to see this and to con- 
front the deeper feelings behind my fascination with pirates and 
other rebels, Paula helped me along the trail toward salvation. 

Beyond my own personal dilemmas, my times in Colombia also 
helped me comprehend the distinction between the old American 
republic and the new global empire. The republic offered hope to the 
world. Its foundation was moral and philosophical rather than 
materialistic. It was based on concepts of equality and justice for all. 
But it also could be pragmatic, not merely a Utopian dream but also 
a living, breathing, magnanimous entity. It could open its arms to 



American Republic versus Global Empire 127 



shelter the downtrodden. It was an inspiration and at the same time 
a force to reckon with; if needed, it could swing into action, as it 
had during World War II, to defend the principles for which it stood. 
The very institutions — the big corporations, banks, and government 
bureaucracies — that threaten the republic could be used instead to 
institute fundamental changes in the world. Such institutions possess 
the communications networks and transportation systems necessary 
to end disease, starvation, and even wars — if only they could be con- 
vinced to take that course. 

The global empire, on the other hand, is the republic's nemesis. It 
is self-centered, self-serving, greedy, and materialistic, a system 
based on mercantilism. Like empires before, its arms open only to 
accumulate resources, to grab everything in sight and stuff its insa- 
tiable maw. It will use whatever means it deems necessary to help its 
rulers gain more power and riches. 

Of course, in learning to understand this distinction I also devel- 
oped a clearer sense of my own role. Claudine had warned me; she 
had honestly outlined what would be expected of me if I accepted 
the job MAIN offered. Yet, it took the experience of working in coun- 
tries like Indonesia, Panama, Iran, and Colombia in order for me to 
understand the deeper implications. And it took the patience, love, 
and personal stories of a woman like Paula. 

I was loyal to the American republic, but what we were perpe- 
trating through this new, highly subtle form of imperialism was the 
financial equivalent of what we had attempted to accomplish mili- 
tarily in Vietnam. If Southeast Asia had taught us that armies have 
limitations, the economists had responded by devising a better plan, 
and the foreign aid agencies and the private contractors who served 
them (or, more appropriately, were served by them) had become 
proficient at executing that plan. 

In countries on every continent, I saw how men and women 
working for U.S. corporations — though not officially part of the 
EHM network— participated in something far more pernicious than 
anything envisioned in conspiracy theories. Like many of MAIN's 
engineers, these workers were blind to the consequences of their ac- 
tions, convinced that the sweatshops and factories that made shoes 
and automotive parts for their companies were helping the poor 
climb out of poverty, instead of simply burying them deeper in a type 



128 Part III: 1975-1981 



of slavey reminiscent of medieval manors and southern plantations. 
Like those earlier manifestations of exploitation, modern serfs or slaves 
were socialized into believing they were better off than the unfortu- 
nate souls who lived on the margins, in the dark hollows of Europe, 
in the jungles of Africa, or in the wilds of the American frontier. 

The struggle over whether I should continue at MAIN or should 
quit had become an open battlefield. There was no doubt that my 
conscience wanted out, but that other side, what I liked to think of 
as my business-school persona, was not so sure. My own empire kept 
expanding; I added employees, countries, and shares of stock to my 
various portfolios and to my ego. In addition to the seduction of the 
money and lifestyle, and the adrenaline high of power, I often re- 
called Claudine warning rne that once I was in I could never get out. 

Of course, Paula sneered at this. "What would she know?" 

I pointed out that Claudine had been right about a great many 
things. 

"That was a long time ago. lives change. Anyway, what difference 
does it make? You're not happy with yourself. What can Claudine or 
anyone else do to make things worse than that?" 

It was a refrain Paula often came back to, and I eventually agreed. 
I admitted to her and to myself that all the money, adventure, and 
glamour no longer justified the turmoil, guilt, and stress. As a 
MAIN partner, I was becoming wealthy, and I knew that if I stayed 
longer I would be permanently trapped. 

One day, while we were strolling along the beach near the old 
Spanish fort at Cartagena, a place that had endured countless pirate 
attacks, Paula hit upon an approach that had not occurred to me. 
"What if you never say anything about the things you know?" she 
asked. 

"You mean... just keep quiet?" 

"Exactly. Don't give them an excuse to come after you. In fact, 
give them every reason to leave you alone, to not muddy the water." 

It made a great deal of sense — I wondered why it never occurred 
to me before. I would not write books or do anything else to expose 
the truth as I had come to see it. I would not be a crusader; instead, 
I would just be a person, concentrate on enjoying life, travel for 
pleasure, perhaps even start a family with someone like Paula. I had 
had enough; I simply wanted out. 



American Republic versus Global Empire 129 



"Everything Claudine taught you is a deception," Paula added. 
"Your life's a lie." She smiled condescendingly. "Have you looked at 
your own resume recently?" 

1 admitted that I had not. 

"Do," she advised. "I read the Spanish version the other day. If it's 
anything like the English one, I think you'll find it very interesting." 






130 Part IN: 1975-1981 



CHAPTER 23 



The Deceptive Resume 



While I was in Colombia, word arrived that Jake Dauber had retired 
as MAIN'S president. As expected, chairman and CEO Mac Hall ap- 
pointed Bruno as Dauber's replacement. The phone lines between 
Boston and Barranquilla went crazy. Everyone predicted that I, too, 
would soon be promoted; after all, I was one of Bruno's most trusted 
proteges. 

These changes and rumors were an added incentive for me to re- 
view my own position. While still in Colombia, I followed Paula's ad- 
vice and read the Spanish version of my resume. It shocked me. Back 
in Boston, I pulled out both the English original and a November 
1978 copy of MAINLINES, the corporate magazine; that edition 
featured me in an article titled, "Specialists Offer MAIN's Clients 
New Sendees." (See pages 133 and 134.) 

I once had taken great pride in that resume and that article, and 
yet now, seeing them as Paula did, I felt a growing sense of anger 
and depression. The material in these documents represented inten- 
tional deceptions, if not lies. And these documents carried a deeper 
significance, a reality that reflected our times and reached to the core 
of our current march to global empire: they epitomized a strategy 
calculated to convey appearances, to shield an underlying reality. In 
a strange way, they symbolized the story of my life, a glossy veneer 
covering synthetic surfaces. 

Of course, it did not give me any great comfort to know that I had 
to take much of the responsibility for what was included in my 



131 



resume. According to standard operating procedures, I was required 
to constantly update both a basic resume and a file with pertinent 
backup information about clients served and the type of work done. 
If a marketing person or project manager wanted to include me in a 
proposal or to use my credentials in some other way, he could massage 
this basic data in a manner that emphasized his particular needs. 

For instance, he might choose to highlight my experience in the 
Middle East, or in making presentations before the World Bank and 
other multinational forums. Whenever this was done, that person 
was supposed to get my approval before actually publishing the re- 
vised resume. However, since like many other MAIN employees 
I traveled a great deal, exceptions were frequently made. Thus, the 
resume Paula suggested I look at, and its English counterpart, were 
completely new to me, although the information certainly was in- 
cluded in my file. 

At first glance, my resume seemed innocent enough. Under Ex- 
perience, it stated that I had been in charge of major projects in the 
United States, Asia, Latin America, and the Middle East, and it pro- 
vided a laundry list of the types of projects: development planning, 
economic forecasting, energy demand forecasting, and so on. This 
section ended by describing my Peace Corps work in Ecuador; how- 
ever, it omitted any reference to the Peace Corps itself, leaving the 
impression that I had been the professional manager of a construction 
materials company, instead of a volunteer assisting a small cooper- 
ative composed of illiterate Andean peasant brick makers. 

Following that was a long list of clients. This list included the In- 
ternational Bank for Reconstruction and Development (the official 
name of the World Bank); the Asian Development Bank; the gov- 
ernment of Kuwait; the Iranian Ministry of Energy; the Arabian- 
American Oil Company of Saudi Arabia; Instituto de Recursos 
Hidraulicos y Electrification; Perusahaan Umum Listrik Negara; 
and many others. But the one that caught my attention was the final 
entry: U.S. Treasury Department, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. I was 
amazed that such a listing had ever made it to print, even though it 
was obviously part of my file. 

Setting aside the resume for a moment, I turned to the MAIN- 
LINES article. I clearly recalled my interview with its author, a very 
talented and well-intentioned young woman. She had given it to me 
for my approval before publishing it. I remembered feeling gratified 

132 Part III: 1975-1981 



EXPERIENCE 



JOHN M PERKINS 



John M- Perkins is Manager of the Economies 

Department of the Power ard Environmental Sy ileitis 
Division. 

Since luiiung MAIN. Mr. Perkins has been in charge of 
inaior projects in the Unite J States. Asia. Latin 

.¦\meriea an J the Middle East. Tim work has included 
Jevelupmeiil planning, economic forecasting, energy 
Jemand forecasting, marketing studies, plant siting. 
¦~ue; allocation analysis, economic feasib:hty studies, 
..¦iviionniental arid economic impact studies, 
investment planning and maiugenien t consulting. In 
jj.iEion. many projects have involved training clients 
in ilie use of techniques developed by Mr. Perkins and 
u:*s:.aff. 

Re con My Mr. Perkins lias been in charge of a project 
design computer program packages for 
nproj.etmg energy demand arid quantifying the 
relationships between economic development and 
onei'gy production, 2) evaluating environmental and 
socio-economic impacts of projects, arid 3) applying 
Markov and econometric models to national and 
:'ej!ioriai economic plannine. 

I'rmr to joining MAIN. Mr. Perkins spent three 

¦-.'i-ars is: Ecuador conducting marketing studies and 
organizing and managing a construction materials 
^crnoanv. He also conducted studies of the feasibility 
of organizing credit and savings cooperatives 

:hi oughout Ecuador. 

EDUCATION 

Bachelor of Aits m Business Admirosiratior, 

Boston University 

Poht Graduate Studies. 

Model Building, Engineering Economics. 

Econometric;. Probability Methods 

LANGUAGES 

English, Spanish 

PROFESSIONAL AFFILIATIONS 

American Economic Association 
Society for International Development 

PUBLICATIONS 

"A Markov Process Applied to Forecasting 

the? Demand for Electricity' 1 

"A Macro Approach to 1'nergy Forecasting 1 ' 

"A Model for Describing the Direct and 

Indirect Interrelationships between the 

Economy and the Environment" 

"Llcctric Energy from Interconnected Sysiems" 

"Markov Method Applied to Planning" 




CREDENTIALS 

Forecasting Studies 

Marketing Studies 

Feasibility Studies 

Site Selection Studies 

Economic Impact Studies 

Investment Planning 

Fuel Supply Studies 

Economic Development Panning 

Training Programs 

Project Managcment 

AElocation Planning 

Management Consulting 

Clients served: 

o Arabian-American Oil Company. Saudi Arabia 

o Asian Development Rank 

o Boise Cascade Co mo tat ion 

o City Service Corporation 

o Dayton Power & Light Company 

o General Eleet'K Compans 

o Government or' Kuwait 

o Institute de Rccursos Hidraulicos y 

Electrification, Panama 

o Inter-American Development Bank 

o IntcrnaLiortai Bank for Reconstruction and 

Development 

o Ministry of Energy. Iran 

o New York Times 

o Power Authority of the State of New York 

n Penisahaan L'mun Listrik \egjra. Indonesia 

o South Carolina Electric and Gas Company 

o Technical Association of the Pulp and Paper 

Industry 

o Union Camp Co^poiation 

o U.S. Treasury Dep!.. Kingdom of Saudi Arabia 




The Deceptive Resume 133 



Specialists offer 

VIAIN's clients new services 



jy Pauline Ouellette 

L oo < i n rj ov e r [he "3c e 5 be - i n c 
:he desks, if 5 easy to ten thfO 
Economics and Regional Planning is 
:nc of ihe most recently f orrn£.;cd 
>nd rsoidlv g'cwjng discipline* at 
ylAIN. Tc date, mere are about 2C 
;;;ecia i5ts in tms croup.. gatne r ed 
x-er a sever i-ysar period. These 
;pec ;-d ^sts i rchjde net only 
•eo^urnist:;, but ;::ity planners, 
icmogryphers, market specialises 
:nd N'AIN's firsi sociologist. 

Wh Me several people we^e 
nfLemial r getting diseconomies 
;rOup started, it oasica! ly came 
ibout through the efforts c! one 
ran, John Perkins, v/ho is new 
toad of the g r oup. 

Hired as an assis'anr to the head 
cad forecaster in Jcnusry, 1971 .. 
ohn was one of the few 
'conanists work ng for MAIN t\ 
he trie. For his " rs: assignment, 
e was sen: as pa r t d an T-mar 
earn tc do an electricity demand 
tudy m Indonesia. 

"They wanted to see if i co.de 
L.rvive there for three months," ho 
aid laughirg -errnniseent y. But 
;-in his background, John had nc 
rouble "surviving," He had just 
pent ;hree years in Ecuador with a 
-Or" struct ion Mate? ias Co-op 
isip ng the Quechua Indians, direct 
iescendants of the 'Ocas, The 



Indians, John said, were be nci 
e x d I r \ - cd i n di e 1 r work as tx c k 
makers so he wa s a s k e c: by 3 ¦ " 
Ecuadoran agency to form a co-op. 
He then --ented a truck to tieip 
them sed the^ bricks emecilv to the 
cc"isuiF'e r s, As a msjit, profits 
¦apid y inci eased by 50^. T-e 
crowds were divided arriony t"e 
members of the coo:.) whir: 1 ", after 
?V? years, rouded 200 famines. 
It was curing tms time that 
John J er<ins met Einar Greve la 
former employee) who was working 
m the town cf "aute, Ecuador, on a 
hydroelectric project "or MAIN. 
The two became fdendiy and, 
through continual correspondence, 
John was offered a position with 
MAIN. 

About a year iete r , John became 
"he head oad "orecastc and, as "he 
demsrids f'om clients and 
insotut ons seen as the World Bank 
grew, he reaii/ed that more 
economists were needed a* MA:N, 
"Wh le MAIN s an engineering 
firm," he said, J 'the clients were 
teNng us we hac to ee more than 
that." He hired more economists >n 
1973 to meet the clients' needs 
a^d, as a result, formed the 
disdpire which brought him the 
title of Chid Economist, 

^ohn's latest project involves 




Perkins 

agdcultural development m Panama 
from w'ie r e he reeen; y returned 
after a month's stay. ! r. v^s in 
Panama that IVAIN conducted its 
1 rst sociological study tnrouyh 
Martha Hayes, MAIN'S fust 
socioiog st, Vlar: spent I'd months 
r Panama to determine [he imeact 
o ; the orojec: on peop e's hves and 
cultures. Specialists in agriculture 
ana other re id leu helds were also 
bred in cor junction wi : h this 
study, 

The expansion o- Eco'mrmcs and 
Regional Planning has been fast 
eoccd, yet Jcnn Seels he has been 
fucky in that each individual hired 
has been a hard wor<mg 
professional. As he spoke ro sre 
from across his desk, the mte r est 
and support h e holds for "is staff 
was evident a r 'd admirable. 



MAINLINES 



November 197 



134 Part 111: 1975-1981 



that she had painted such a flattering portrait of me, and I immedi- 
ately approved it. Once again, the responsibility fell on my shoulders. 
The article began: 

Looking over the faces behind the desks, it's easy to tell 
that Economics and Regional Planning is one of the most 
recently formed and rapidly growing disciplines at MAIN. .. 

While several people were influential in getting the 
economics group started, it basically came about through 
the efforts of one man, John Perkins, who is now head of 
the group. 

Hired as an assistant to the head load forecaster in 
January, 1971, John was one of the few economists work- 
ing for MAIN at the time. For his first assignment, he 
was sent as part of an 11-man team to do an electricity 
demand study in Indonesia. 

The article briefly summarized my previous work history, de- 
scribed how I had "spent three years in Ecuador," and then contin- 
ued with the following: 

It was during this time that John Perkins met Einar 
Greve (a former employee) [he had since left MAIN to 
become president of the Tucson Gas & Electric Com- 
pany] who was working in the town of Paute, Ecuador, 
on a hydroelectric project for MAIN. The two became 
friendly and, through continual correspondence, John 
was offered a position with MAIN. 

About a year later, John became the head load fore- 
caster and, as the demands from clients and institutions 
such as the World Bank grew, he realized that more 
economists were needed at MAIN. 

None of the statements in either document were outright lies — 
the backup for both documents was on the record, in my file; how- 
ever, they conveyed a perception that I now found to be twisted and 
sanitized. And in a culture that worships official documents, they 
perpetrated something that was even more sinister. Outright lies can 
be refuted. Documents like those two were impossible to refute 

The Deceptive Resume 135 



because they were based on glimmers of truth, not open deceptions, 
and because they were produced by a corporation that had earned 
the trust of other corporations, international banks, and governments. 

This was especially true of the resume because it was an official 
document, as opposed to the article, which was a bylined interview 
in a magazine. The MAIN logo, appearing on the bottom of the re- 
sume and on the covers of all the proposals and reports that resume 
was likely to grace, carried a lot of weight in the world of interna- 
tional business; it was a seal of authenticity that elicited the same 
level of confidence as those stamped on diplomas and framed cer- 
tificates hanging in doctors' and lawyers' offices. 

These documents portrayed me as a very competent economist, 
head of a department at a prestigious consulting firm, who was trav- 
eling around the globe conducting a broad range of studies that 
would make the world a more civilized and prosperous place. The 
deception was not in what was stated, but in what was omitted. If 
I put on an outsider's hat — took a purely objective look — I had to 
admit that those omissions raised many questions. 

For example, there was no mention of my recruitment by the 
NSA or of Einar Greve's connection with the Army and his role as an 
NSA liaison. There obviously was no discussion of the fact that I had 
been under tremendous pressure to produce highly inflated economic 
forecasts, or that much of my job revolved around arranging huge 
loans that countries like Indonesia and Panama could never repay. 
There was no praise for the integrity of my predecessor, Howard 
Parker, nor any acknowledgment that I became the head load fore- 
caster because I was willing to provide the biased studies my bosses 
wanted, rather than — like Howard — saying what I believed was 
true and getting fired as a result. Most puzzling was that final entry, 
under the list of my clients: U.S. Treasury Department, Kingdom of 
Saudi Arabia. 

I kept returning to that line, and I wondered how people would 
interpret it. They might well ask what is the connection between the 
U.S. Department of the Treasury and Saudi Arabia. Perhaps some 
would take it as a typo, two separate lines erroneously compressed 
into one. Most readers, though, would never guess the truth, that it 
had been included for a specific reason. It was there so that those in 
the inner circle of the world where I operated would understand that 
I had been part of the team that crafted the deal of the century, the 

136 Part III: 1975-1981 



deal that changed the course of world history but never reached the 
newspapers. I helped create a covenant that guaranteed continued 
oil for America, safeguarded the rule of the House of Saud, and 
assisted in the financing of Osama bin Laden and the protection of 
international criminals like Uganda's Idi Amin. That single line in 
my resume spoke to those in the know. It said that MAIN'S chief 
economist was a man who could deliver. 

The final paragraph of the MAINLINES article was a personal 
observation by the author, and it struck a raw nerve: 

The expansion of Economics and Regional Planning 
has been fast paced, yet John feels he has been lucky in 
that each individual hired has been a hard-working 
professional. As he spoke to me from across his desk, 
the interest and support he holds for his staff was evident 
and admirable. 

The fact was that I had never thought of myself as a bona fide 
economist. I had graduated with a bachelor of science in business 
administration from Boston University, emphasis on marketing. I 
had always been lousy in mathematics and statistics. At Middlebury 
College, I had majored in American literature; writing had come 
easily to me. My status as chief economist and as manager of Eco- 
nomics and Regional Planning could not be attributed to my capa- 
bilities in either economics or planning; rather, it was a function of 
my willingness to provide the types of studies and conclusions my 
bosses and clients wanted, combined with a natural acumen for per- 
suading others through the written word. In addition, I was clever 
enough to hire very competent people, many with master's degrees 
and a couple with PhDs, acquiring a staff who knew a whole lot more 
about the technicalities of my business than I did. Small wonder that 
the author of that article concluded that "the interest and support he 
holds for his staff was evident and admirable." 

I kept these two documents and several other similar ones in the 
top drawer of my desk, and I returned to them frequently. After- 
ward, I sometimes found myself outside my office, wandering among 
the desks of my staff, looking at those men and women who worked 
for me and feeling guilty about what I had done to them, and about 
the role we all played in widening the gap between rich and poor. I 



The Deceptive Resume 13/ 



thought about the people who starved each day while my staff and I 
slept in first-class hotels, ate at the finest restaurants, and built up 
our financial portfolios. 

I thought about the fact that people I trained had now joined the 
ranks of EHMs. I had brought them in. I had recruited them and 
trained them. But it had not been the same as when I joined. The 
world had shifted and the corporatocracy had progressed. We had 
gotten better or more pernicious. The people who worked for me 
were a different breed from me. There had been no NSA polygraphs 
or Claudines in their lives. No one had spelled it out for them, what 
they were expected to do to carry on the mission of global empire. 
They had never heard the term economic hit man or even EHM, nor 
had they been told they were in for life. They simply had learned 
from my example and from my system of rewards and punishments. 
They knew that they were expected to produce the types of studies 
and results I wanted. Their salaries, Christmas bonuses, indeed their 
very jobs, depended on pleasing me. 

I, of course, had done everything I could imagine to lighten their 
burden. I had written papers, given lectures, and taken every possi- 
ble opportunity to convince them of the importance of optimistic 
forecasts, of huge loans, of infusions of capital that would spur GNP 
growth and make the world a better place. It had required less than 
a decade to arrive at this point where the seduction, the coercion, 
had taken a much more subtle form, a sort of gentle style of brain- 
washing. Now these men and women who sat at desks outside my 
office overlooking Boston's Back Bay were going out into the world 
to advance the cause of global empire. In a very real sense, I had cre- 
ated them, even as Claudine had created me. But unlike me, they 
had been kept in the dark. 

Many nights I lay awake, thinking, fretting about these things. 
Paula's reference to my resume had opened a Pandora's box, and I 
often felt jealous of my employees for their naivete. I had intention- 
ally deceived them, and in so doing, had protected them from their 
own consciences. They did not have to struggle with the moral issues 
that haunted me. 

I also thought a great deal about the idea of integrity in business, 
about appearances versus reality. Certainly, I told myself, people have 
deceived each other since the beginning of history. Legend and folk- 
lore are full of tales about distorted truths and fraudulent deals: 



138 Part III: 1975-1981 



cheating rug merchants, usurious moneylenders, and tailors willing 
to convince the emperor that his clothes are invisible only to him. 

However, much as I wanted to conclude that things were the 
same as they always had been, that the facade of my MAIN resume 
and the reality behind it were merely reflections of human nature, I 
knew in my heart this was not the case. Things had changed. I now 
understood that we have reached a new level of deception, one that 
will lead to our own destruction — not only morally, but also physi- 
cally, as a culture — unless we make significant changes soon. 

The example of organized crime seemed to offer a metaphor. Mafia 
bosses often start out as street thugs. But over time, the ones who 
make it to the top transform their appearance. They take to wearing 
impeccably tailored suits, owning legitimate businesses, and wrap- 
ping themselves in the cloak of upstanding society. They support local 
charities and are respected by their communities. They are quick to 
lend money to those in desperate straits. Like the John Perkins in 
the MAIN resume, these men appear to be model citizens. However, 
beneath this patina is a trail of blood. When the debtors cannot pay, 
hit men move in to demand their pound of flesh. If this is not 
granted, the jackals close in with baseball bats. Finally, as a last re- 
sort, out come the guns. 

I realized that my gloss as chief economist, head of Economics 
and Regional Planning, was not the simple deception of a rug dealer, 
not something of which a buyer can beware. It was part of a sinister 
system aimed not at outfoxing an unsuspecting customer, but rather 
at promoting the most subtle and effective form of imperialism the 
world has ever known. Every one of the people on my staff also held 
a title — financial analyst, sociologist, economist, lead economist, 
econometrician, shadow pricing expert, and so forth — and yet none 
of those titles indicated that ever}' one of them was, in his or her own 
way, an EHM, that every one of them was serving the interests of 
global empire. 

Nor did the fact of those titles among my staff suggest that we 
were just the tip of the iceberg. Every major international company 
— from ones that marketed shoes and sporting goods to those that 
manufactured heavy equipment — had its own EHM equivalents. 
The march had begun and it was rapidly encircling the planet. The 
hoods had discarded their leather jackets, dressed up in business 
suits, and taken on an air of respectability. Men and women were 

The Deceptive Resume 139 



descending from corporate headquarters in New York, Chicago, San 
Francisco, London, and Tokyo, streaming across every continent to 
convince corrupt politicians to allow their countries to be shackled 
to the corporatocracy, and to induce desperate people to sell their 
bodies to sweatshops and assembly lines. 

It was disturbing to understand that the unspoken details behind 
the written words of my resume and of that article defined a world of 
smoke and mirrors intended to keep us all shackled to a system that 
is morally repugnant and ultimately self-destructive. By getting me 
to read between the lines, Paula had nudged me to take one more 
step along a path that would ultimately transform my life. 



140 Part III: 1975-1981 



CHAPTER 24 

Ecuador's President Battles Big Oil 



My work in Colombia and Panama gave me many opportunities to 
stay in touch with and to visit the first country to be my home away 
from home. Ecuador had suffered under a long line of dictators and 
right-wing oligarchies manipulated by U.S. political and commercial 
interests. In a way, the country was the quintessential banana re- 
public, and the corporatocracy had made major inroads there. 

The serious exploitation of oil in the Ecuadorian Amazon basin 
began in the late 1960s, and it resulted in a buying spree in which 
the small club of families who ran Ecuador played into the hands 
of the international banks. They saddled their country with huge 
amounts of debt, backed by the promise of oil revenues. Roads and 
industrial parks, hydroelectric dams, transmission and distribution 
systems, and other power projects sprang up all over the country. 
International engineering and construction companies struck it rich 
— once again. 

One man whose star was rising over this Andean country was the 
exception to the rule of political corruption and complicity with the 
corporatocracy. Jaime Roldos was a university professor and attor- 
ney in his late thirties, whom I had met on several occasions. He was 
charismatic and charming. Once, I impetuously offered to fly to 
Quito and provide free consulting services any time he asked. I said 
it partially in jest, but also because I would gladly have done it on my 
own vacation time — I liked him and, as I was quick to tell him, was 
always looking for a good excuse to visit his country. He laughed and 



141 



offered me a similar deal, saying that whenever I needed to negoti- 
ate my oil bill, I could call on him. 

He had established a reputation as a populist and a nationalist, a 
person who believed strongly in the rights of the poor and in the re- 
sponsibility of politicians to use a country's natural resources pru- 
dently. When he began campaigning for the presidency in 1978, he 
captured the attention of his countrymen and of citizens in every na- 
tion where foreign interests exploited oil — or where people desired 
independence from the influences of powerful outside forces. Roldos 
was the rare modern politician who was not afraid to oppose the 
status quo. He went after the oil companies and the not-so-subtle 
system that supported them. 

For instance, he accused the Summer Institute of Linguistics 
(SIL), an evangelical missionary group from the United States, of 
sinister collusion with the oil companies. I was familiar with SIL 
missionaries from my Peace Corps days. The organization had en- 
tered Ecuador, as it had so many other countries, under the pretext 
of studying, recording, and translating indigenous languages. 

SIL had been working extensively with the Huaorani tribe in the 
Amazon basin area, during the early years of oil exploration, when a 
disturbing pattern emerged. Whenever seismologists reported to 
corporate headquarters that a certain region had characteristics 
indicating a high probability of oil beneath the surface, SIL went in 
and encouraged the indigenous people to move from that land, onto 
missionary reservations; there they would receive free food, shelter, 
clothes, medical treatment and missionary-style education. The con- 
dition was that they had to deed their lands to the oil companies. 

Rumors abounded that SIL missionaries used an assortment of 
underhanded techniques to persuade the tribes to abandon their 
homes and move to the missions. A frequently repeated story was 
that they had donated food heavily laced with laxatives — then offered 
medicines to cure the diarrhea epidemic. Throughout Huaorani ter- 
ritory. SIL airdropped false-bottomed food baskets containing tiny 
radio transmitters; receivers at highly sophisticated communications 
stations, manned by U.S. military personnel at the army base in 
Shell, tuned in to these transmitters. Whenever a member of the 
tribe was bitten by a poisonous snake or became seriously ill, an SIL 
representative arrived with antivenom or the proper medicines — often 
in oil company helicopters. 



142 Part III: 1975-1981 



During the early days of oil exploration, five SIL missionaries 
were found dead with Huaorani spears protruding from their bod- 
ies. Later, the Huaoranis claimed they did this to send SIL a message 
to keep out. The message went unheeded. In fact, it ultimately had 
the opposite effect. Rachel Saint, the sister of one of the murdered 
men, toured the United States, appearing on national television in 
order to raise money and support for SIL and the oil companies, who 
she claimed were helping the "savages" become civilized and educated. 

SIL received funding from the Rockefeller charities. Jaime Roldos 
claimed that these Rockefeller connections proved that SIL was re- 
ally a front for stealing indigenous lands and promoting oil explo- 
ration; family scion John D. Rockefeller had founded Standard Oil 
— which later divested into the majors, including Chevron, Exxon, 
and Mobil. 1 

Roldos struck me as a man who walked the path blazed by Torrijos. 
Both stood up to the world's strongest superpower. Torrijos wanted 
to take back the Canal, while Roldos's strongly nationalistic position 
on oil threatened the worlds most influential companies. Like Torrijos, 
Roldos was not a Communist, but rather stood for the right of his 
country to determine its own destiny. And as they had with Torrijos, 
pundits predicted that big business and Washington would never 
tolerate Roldos as president, that if elected he would meet a fate 
similar to that of Guatemala's Arbenz or Chile's Allende. 

It seemed to me that the two men together might spearhead a 
new movement in Latin American politics and that this movement 
might form the foundation of changes that could affect every nation 
on the planet. These men were not Castros or Gadhafis. They were 
not associated with Russia or China or, as in Allende 's case, with the 
international Socialist movement. They were popular, intelligent, 
charismatic leaders who were pragmatic instead of dogmatic. They 
were nationalistic but not anti-American. If corporatocracy was built 
on three pillars — major corporations, international banks, and col- 
luding governments — Roldos and Torrijos held out the possibility of 
removing the pillar of government collusion. 

A major part of the Roldos platform was what came to be known as 
the Hydrocarbons Policy. This policy was based on the premise that 
Ecuador's greatest potential resource was petroleum and that all 
future exploitation of that resource should be done in a manner that 
would bring the greatest benefit to the largest percentage of the 



Ecuador's President Battles Big Oil 143 



population. Roldos was a firm believer in the state's obligation to 
assist the poor and disenfranchised. He expressed hope that the 
Hydrocarbons Policy could in fact be used as a vehicle for bringing 
about social reform. He had to walk a fine line, however, because he 
knew that in Ecuador, as in so many other countries, he could not be 
elected without the support of at least some of the most influential 
families, and that even if he should manage to win without them, he 
would never see his programs implemented without their support. 

I w r as personally relieved that Carter was in the White House 
during this crucial time. Despite pressures from Texaco and other oil 
interests, Washington stayed pretty much out of the picture. I knew 
this would not have been the case under most other administrations 
— Republican or Democrat. 

More than any other issue, I believe it was the Hydrocarbons Policy 
that coroinced Ecuadorians to send Jaime Roldos to the Presidential 
Palace in Quito — their first democratically elected president after a 
long line of dictators. He outlined the basis of this policy in his Au- 
gust 10, 1979, inaugural address: 

We must take effective measures to defend the energy 
resources of the nation. The State (must) maintain the 
diversification of its exports and not lose its economic 
independence... Our decisions will be inspired solely by 
national interests and in the unrestricted defense of our 
sovereign rights. 2 

Once in office, Roldos had to focus on Texaco, since by that time 
it had become the main player in the oil game. It was an extremely 
rocky relationship. The oil giant did not trust the new president and 
did not want to be part of any policy that would set new r precedents. 
It was very aware that such policies might serve as models in other 
countries. 

A speech delivered by a key advisor to Roldos, Jose Carvajal, 
summed up the new administration's attitude: 

If a partner [Texaco] does not want to take risks, to make 
investments for exploration, or to exploit the areas of an 
oil concession, the other partner has the right to make 
those investments and then to take over as the owner... 



144 Part III: 1975-1981 



We believe our relations with foreign companies have 
to be just; we have to be tough in the struggle; we have to 
be prepared for all kinds of pressures, but we should not 
display fear or an inferiority complex in negotiating with 
those foreigners. 3 

On New Year's Day, 1980, 1 made a resolution. It was the begin- 
ning of a new decade. In twenty-eight days, I would turn thirty-five. 
I resolved that during the next year I would make a major change in 
my life and that in the future I would try to model myself after mod- 
ern heroes like Jaime Roldos and Omar Torrijos. 

In addition, something shocking had happened months earlier. 
From a profitability standpoint, Bruno had been the most successful 
president in MAIN'S history. Nonetheless, suddenly and without 
warning, Mac Hall had fired him. 



Ecuador's President Battles Big Oil 145 



CHAPTER 25 



I Quit 



Mac Hall's firing of Bruno hit MAIN like an earthquake. It caused 
turmoil and dissension throughout the company. Bruno had his 
share of enemies, but even some of them were dismayed. To many 
employees it was obvious that the motive had been jealousy. During 
discussions across the lunch table or around the coffee wagon, people 
often confided that they thought Hall felt threatened by this man 
who was more than fifteen years his junior and who had taken the 
firm to new levels of profitability. 

"Hall couldn't allow Bruno to go on looking so good," one man 
said. "Hall had to know that it was just a matter of time before Bruno 
would take over and the old man would be out to pasture." 

As if to prove such theories, Hall appointed Paul Priddy as the 
new president. Paul had been a vice president at MAIN for years and 
was an amiable, nuts-and-bolts engineer. In my opinion, he was also 
lackluster, a yes-man who would bow to the chairman's whims and 
would never threaten him with stellar profits. My opinion was shared 
by many others. 

For me, Bruno's departure was devastating. He had been a per- 
sonal mentor and a key factor in our international work. Priddy, on 
the other hand, had focused on domestic jobs and knew little if any- 
thing about the true nature of our overseas roles. I had to question 
where the company would go from here. I called Bruno at his home 
and found him philosophical. 

"Well, John, he knew he had no cause," he said of Hall, "so I 



146 



demanded a very good severance package, and I got it. Mac controls 
a huge block of voting stock, and once he made his move there was 
nothing I could do." Bruno indicated that he was considering several 
offers of high-level positions at multinational banks that had been 
our clients. 

I asked him what he thought I should do. 

"Keep your eyes open," he advised. "Mac Hall has lost touch with 
reality, but no one will tell him so — especially not now; after what he 
did to me." 

In late March 1980, still smarting from the firing, I took a sailing 
vacation in the Virgin Islands. I was joined by "Mary," a young woman 
who also worked for MAIN. Although I did not think about it when 
I chose the location, I now T know that the region's history was a fac- 
tor in helping me make a decision that would start to fulfill my New 
Year's resolution. The first inkling occurred early one afternoon as 
we rounded St. John Island and tacked into Sir Francis Drake Chan- 
nel, which separates the American from the British Virgin Islands. 

The channel was named, of course, after the English scourge of 
the Spanish gold fleets. That fact reminded me of the many times 
during the past decade when I had thought about pirates and other 
historical figures, men like Drake and Sir Henry Morgan, who robbed 
and plundered and exploited and yet were lauded — even knighted 
— for their activities. I had often asked myself why, given that I had 
been raised to respect such people, I should have qualms about ex- 
ploiting countries like Indonesia, Panama, Colombia, and Ecuador. 
So many of my heroes — - Ethan Allen, Thomas Jefferson, George 
Washington, Daniel Boone, Davy Crockett, Lewis and Clark, to 
name just a few — had exploited Indians, slaves, and lands that did 
not belong to them, and I had drawn upon their examples to assuage 
my guilt. Now, tacking up Sir Francis Drake Channel, I saw the folly 
of my past rationalizations. 

I remembered some things I had conveniently ignored over the 
years. Ethan Allen spent several months in fetid and cramped British 
prison ships, much of the time locked into thirty pounds of iron 
shackles, and then more time in an English dungeon. He was a pris- 
oner of war, captured at the 1775 Battle of Montreal while fighting 
for the same sorts of freedom Jaime Roldos and Omar Torrijos now 
sought for their people. Thomas Jefferson, George Washington, and 
all the other Founding Fathers had risked their lives for similar ideals. 

I Quit 147 



Winning the revolution was no foregone conclusion; they under- 
stood that if they lost, they would be hanged as traitors. Daniel 
Boone, Daw Crockett, and Lewis and Clark also had endured great 
hardships and made many sacrifices. 

And Drake and Morgan? I was a bit hazy about that period in his- 
tory, but I remembered that Protestant England had seen itself sorely 
threatened by Catholic Spain. I had to admit to the possibility that 
Drake and Morgan had turned to piracy in order to strike at the heart 
of the Spanish empire, at those gold ships, to defend the sanctity of 
England, rather than out of a desire for self-aggrandizement. 

As we sailed up that channel, tacking back and forth into the 
wind, inching closer to the mountains rising from the sea — Great 
Thatch Island to the north and St. John to the south — I could not 
erase these thoughts from my mind. Mary handed me a beer and 
turned up the volume on a Jimmy Buffet* song. Yet, despite the beauty 
that surrounded me and the sense of freedom that sailing usually 
brings, I felt angry. I tried to brush it off. I chugged down the beer. 

The emotion would not leave. I was angered by those voices from 
history and the way I had used them to rationalize my own greed. I 
was furious at my parents, and at Tilton — that self-righteous prep 
school on the hill -—for imposing all that history on me. I popped 
open another beer. I could have killed Mac Hall for what he had 
done to Bruno. 

A wooden boat with a rainbow flag sailed past us, its sails billow- 
ing out on both sides, downwinding through the channel. A half 
dozen young men and women shouted and waved at us, hippies in 
brightly colored sarongs, one couple stark naked on the foredeck. It 
was obvious from the boat itself and the look about them that they 
lived aboard, a communal society, modern pirates, free, uninhibited. 

I tried to wave back but my hand would not obey. I felt overcome 
with jealousy. 

Mary stood on the deck, watching them as they faded into the 
distance at our stern. "How would you like that life?" she asked. 

And then I understood. It was not about my parents, Tilton, or 
Mac Hall. It was my life I hated. Mine. The person responsible, the 
one I loathed, was me. 

Mary shouted something. She was pointing over the starboard 
bow. She stepped closer to me. "Leinster Bay," she said. "Tonight's 
anchorage." 



148 Part III: 1975-1981 



There it was, nestled into St. John Island, a cove where pirate ships 
had lain in wait for the gold fleet when it passed through this very 
body of water. I sailed in closer, then handed the tiller over to Mary 
and headed up to the foredeck. As she navigated the boat around 
Watermelon Cay and into the beautiful bay, I lowered and bagged 
the jib and hauled the anchor out of its locker. She deftly dropped 
the mainsail. I nudged the anchor over the side; the chain rattled 
down into the crystal clear water and the boat drifted to a stop. 

After we settled in, Mary took a swim and a nap. I left her a note 
and rowed the dinghy ashore, beaching it just below the ruins of an 
old sugar plantation. I sat there next to the water for a long time, try- 
ing not to think, concentrating on emptying myself of all emotion. 
But it did not work. 

Late in the afternoon, I struggled up the steep hill and found my- 
self standing on the crumbling walls of this ancient plantation, look- 
ing down at our anchored sloop. I watched the sun sink toward the 
Caribbean. It all seemed very idyllic, yet I knew that the plantation 
surrounding me had been the scene of untold misery; hundreds of 
African slaves had died here — forced at gunpoint to build the stately 
mansion, to plant and harvest the cane, and to operate the equip- 
ment that turned raw sugar into the basic ingredient of rum. The 
tranquility of the place masked its history of brutality, even as it 
masked the rage that surged within me. 

The sun disappeared behind a mountain- ridged island. A vast 
magenta arch spread across the sky. The sea began to darken, and I 
came face-to-face with the shocking fact that I too had been a slaver, 
that my job at MAIN had not been just about using debt to draw 
poor countries into the global empire. My inflated forecasts were not 
merely vehicles for assuring that when my country needed oil we 
could call in our pound of flesh, and my position as a partner was not 
simply about enhancing the firm's profitability. My job was also 
about people and their families, people akin to the ones who had died 
to construct the wall I sat on, people I had exploited. 

For ten years, I had been the heir of those slavers who had 
marched into African jungles and hauled men and women off to 
waiting ships. Mine had been a more modern approach, subtler — I 
never had to see the dying bodies, smell the rotting flesh, or hear the 
screams of agony. But what I had done was every bit as sinister, and 
because I could remove myself from it, because I could cut myself off 

I Quit 149 



from the personal aspects, the bodies, the flesh, and the screams, 
perhaps in the final analysis I was the greater sinner. 

I glanced again at the sloop where it rode at anchor, straining 
against the outflowing tide. Mary was lounging on the deck, proba- 
bly drinking a margarita and waiting to hand one to me. In that mo- 
ment, seeing her there in that last light of the day, so relaxed, so 
trusting, I was struck by what I was doing to her and to all the others 
who worked for me, the ways I was turning them into EHMs. I was 
doing to them what Claudine had done to me, but without Claudine s 
honesty. I was seducing them through raises and promotions to be 
slavers, and yet they, like me, were also being shackled to the system. 
They too were enslaved. 

I turned away from the sea and the bay and the magenta sky. I 
closed my eyes to the walls that had been built by slaves torn from 
their African homes. I tried to shut it all out. When I opened my 
eyes, I was staring at a large gnarled stick, as thick as a baseball bat 
and twice as long. I leaped up, grabbed the stick, and began slam- 
ming it against the stone walls. I beat on those walls until I collapsed 
from exhaustion. I lay in the grass after that, watching the clouds 
drift over me. 

Eventually I made my way back down to the dinghy. I stood there 
on the beach, looking out at our sailboat anchored in the azure wa- 
ters, and I knew what I had to do. I knew that if I ever went back to 
my former life, to MAIN and all it represented, I would be lost for- 
ever. The raises, the pensions, the insurance and perks, the equity... 
The longer I stayed, the more difficult it was to get out. I had become 
a slave. I could continue to beat myself up as I had beat on those 
stone walls, or I could escape. 

Two days later I returned to Boston. On April 1, 1980, 1 walked 
into Paul Priddy's office and resigned. 



150 Part III: 1975-1981 



PART IV: 
1981-PRESENT 






CHAPTER 26 

Ecuador's Presidential Death 



Leaving MAIN was no easy matter; Paul Priddy refused to believe 
me. "April Fool's," he winked. 

I assured him that I was serious. Recalling Paula's advice that I 
should do nothing to antagonize anyone or to give cause for suspicion 
that I might expose my EHM work, I emphasized that I appreciated 
everything MAIN had done for me but that I needed to move on. I 
had always wanted to write about the people that MAIN had intro- 
duced me to around the world, but nothing political. I said I wanted 
to freelance for National Geographic and other magazines, and to 
continue to travel. I declared my loyalty to MAIN and swore that I 
would sing its praises at every opportunity. Finally, Paul gave in. 

After that, everyone else tried to talk me out of resigning. I was 
reminded frequently about how good I had it, and I was even accused 
of insanity. I came to understand that no one wanted to accept the 
fact that 1 was leaving voluntarily, at least in part, because it forced 
them to look at themselves. If I were not crazy for leaving, then they 
might have to consider their own sanity in staying. It was easier to 
see me as a person who had departed from his senses. 

Particularly disturbing were the reactions of my staff. In their 
eyes, I was deserting them, and there was no strong heir apparent. 
However, I had made up my mind. After all those years of vacilla- 
tion, I now was determined to make a clean sweep. 

Unfortunately, it did not quite work out that way. True, I no 
longer had a job, but since I had been far from a fully vested partner, 



153 



the cash-out of my stock was not sufficient for retirement. Had I 
stayed at MAIN another few years, 1 might have become the forty- 
year-old millionaire I had once envisioned; however, at thirty-five I 
had a long way to go to accomplish that objective. Tt was a cold and 
dreary April in Boston. 

Then one day Paul Priddy called and pleaded with me to come to 
his office. "One of our clients is threatening to drop us," he said. "They 
hired us because they wanted you to represent them on the expert 
witness stand." 

I thought a lot about it. By the time I sat across the desk from 
Paul, I had made my decision. T named my price — a retainer that was 
more than three times what my MAIN salary had been. To my sur- 
prise, he agreed, and that started me on a new career. 

For the next several years, I was employed as a highly paid expert 
witness — primarily for U.S. electric utility companies seeking to have 
new power plants approved for construction by public utilities 
commissions. One of my clients was the Public Sendee Company of 
New Hampshire. My job was to justify, under oath, the economic 
feasibility of the highly controversial Seabrook nuclear power plant. 

Although I was no longer directly involved with Latin America, I 
continued to follow events there. As an expert witness, I had lots of 
time between appearances on the stand. I kept in touch with Paula 
and renewed old friendships from my Peace Corps days in Ecuador 
— a country that had suddenly jumped to center stage in the world 
of international oil politics. 

Jaime Roldos was moving forward. He took his campaign prom- 
ises seriously and he was launching an all-out attack on the oil com- 
panies. He seemed to see clearly the things that many others on both 
sides of the Panama Canal either missed or chose to ignore. He un- 
derstood the underlying currents that threatened to turn the world 
into a global empire and to relegate the citizens of his country to a very 
minor role, bordering on servitude. As I read the newspaper articles 
about him, I was impressed not only by his commitment, but also by 
his ability to perceive the deeper issues. And the deeper issues pointed 
to the fact that we were entering a new epoch of world politics. 

In November 1980, Carter lost the U.S. presidential election to 
Ronald Reagan. The Panama Canal Treaty he had negotiated with 
Torrijos, and the situation in Iran, especially the hostages held at the 
U.S. Embassy and the failed rescue attempt, were major factors. 

154 Part IV: 1981-Present 



However, something subtler was also happening. A president whose 
greatest goal was world peace and who was dedicated to reducing 
U.S. dependence on oil was replaced by a man who believed that the 
United States' rightful place was at the top of a world pyramid held 
up by military muscle, and that controlling oil fields wherever they 
existed was part of our Manifest Destiny. A president who installed 
solar panels on White House roofs was replaced by one who, imme- 
diately upon occupying the Oval Office, had them removed. 

Carter may have been an ineffective politician, but he had a vision 
for America that was consistent with the one defined in our Decla- 
ration of Independence. In retrospect, he now seems naively archaic, 
a throwback to the ideals that molded this nation and drew so many 
of our grandparents to her shores. When we compare him to his im- 
mediate predecessors and successors, he is an anomaly. His world- 
view was inconsistent with that of the EHMs. 

Reagan, on the other hand, was most definitely a global empire 
builder, a servant of the corporatocracy. At the time of his election, 
I found it fitting that he was a Hollywood actor, a man who had fol- 
lowed orders passed down from moguls, who knew how to take di- 
rection. That would be his signature. He would cater to the men who 
shuttled back and forth from corporate CEO offices to bank boards 
and into the halls of government. He would serve the men who ap- 
peared to serve him but who in fact ran the government — men like 
Vice President George H. W. Bush, Secretary of State George Shultz, 
Secretary of Defense Caspar Weinberger, Richard Cheney, Richard 
Helms, and Robert McNamara. He would advocate what those men 
wanted: an America that controlled the world and all its resources, 
a world that answered to the commands of that America, a U.S. mil- 
itary that would enforce the rules as they were written by America, 
and an international trade and banking system that supported 
America as CEO of the global empire. 

As I looked into the future, it seemed we were entering a period 
that would be very good to the EHMs. It was another twist of fate 
that 1 had chosen this moment in history to drop out. The more I re- 
flected on it, however, the better I felt about it. I knew that my timing 
was right. 

As for what this meant in the long term, I had no crystal ball; 
however, I knew from history that empires do not endure and that the 
pendulum always swings in both directions. From my perspective, 

Ecuador's Presidential Death 155 



men like Roldos offered hope. I was certain that Ecuador's new pres- 
ident understood many of the subtleties of the current situation. I 
knew that he had been a Torrijos admirer and had applauded Carter 
for his courageous stand on the Panama Canal issue. I felt certain 
that Roldos would not falter. I could only hope that his fortitude 
would light a candle for the leaders of other countries, who needed 
the type of inspiration he and Torrijos could provide. 

Early in 1981, the Roldos administration formally presented his 
new hydrocarbons law to the Ecuadorian Congress. If implemented, 
it would reform the country's relationship to oil companies. By many 
standards, it was considered revolutionary and even radical. It cer- 
tainly aimed to change the way business was conducted. Its influ- 
ence would stretch far beyond Ecuador, into much of Latin America 
and throughout the world. 1 

The oil companies reacted predictably — they pulled out all the 
stops. Their public relations people went to work to vilify Jaime 
Roldos, and their lobbyists swept into Quito and Washington, brief- 
cases full of threats and payoffs. They tried to paint the first demo- 
cratically elected president of Ecuador in modern times as another 
Castro. But Roldos would not cave in to intimidation. He responded 
by denouncing the conspiracy between politics and oil — and religion. 
He openly accused the Summer Institute of Linguistics of colluding 
with the oil companies and then, in an extremely bold — perhaps 
reckless — move, he ordered SIL out of the country. 2 

Only weeks after sending his legislative package to Congress and 
a couple of days after expelling the SIL missionaries, Roldos warned 
all foreign interests, including but not limited to oil companies, that 
unless they implemented plans that would help Ecuador's people, 
they would be forced to leave his country. He delivered a major 
speech at the Atahualpa Olympic Stadium in Quito and then headed 
off to a small community in southern Ecuador. 

He died there in a fiery airplane crash, on May 24, 1981. 3 

The world was shocked. Latin Americans were outraged. News- 
papers throughout the hemisphere blazed, "CIA Assassination!" In 
addition to the fact that Washington and the oil companies hated 
him, many circumstances appeared to support these allegations, and 
such suspicions were heightened as more facts became known. 
Nothing was ever proven, but eyewitnesses claimed that Roldos, 
forewarned about an attempt on his life, had taken precautions, 

156 Part IV: 1981-Present 



including traveling in two airplanes. At the last moment, it was said, 
one of his security officers had convinced him to board the decoy air- 
plane. It had blown up. 

Despite world reaction, the news hardly made the U.S. press. 

Osvaldo Hurtado took over as Ecuador's president. He reinstated 
the Summer Institute of Linguistics and their oil company sponsors. 
By the end of the year, he had launched an ambitious program to in- 
crease oil drilling by Texaco and other foreign companies in the Gulf 
of Guayaquil and the Amazon basin. 4 

Omar Torrijos, in eulogizing Roldos, referred to him as "brother." 
He also confessed to having nightmares about his own assassina- 
tion; he saw himself dropping from the sky in a gigantic fireball. It 
was prophetic. 



Ecuador's Presidential Death 15? 



CHAPTER 27 

Panama: Another Presidential Death 



I was stunned by Roldos's death, but perhaps I should not have been. 
I was anything but naive. I knew about Arbenz, Mossadegh, Allende 
— and about many other people whose names never made the news- 
papers or history books but whose lives were destroyed and sometimes 
cut short because they stood up to the corporatocracy. Nevertheless. 
I was shocked. It was just so very blatant. 

I had concluded, after our phenomenal success in Saudi Arabia, 
that such wantonly overt actions were things of the past. I thought 
the jackals had been relegated to zoos. Now I saw that I was wrong. 
I had no doubt that Roldos's death had not been an accident. It had 
all the markings of a CIA-orchestrated assassination. I understood 
that it had been executed so blatantly in order to send a message. 
The new Reagan administration, complete with its fast-draw Holly- 
wood cowboy image, was the ideal vehicle for delivering such a mes- 
sage. The jackals were back, and they wanted Omar Torrijos and 
everyone else who might consider joining an anti-corporatocracy 
crusade to know it. 

But Torrijos was not buckling. Like Roldos, he refused to be in- 
timidated. He, too, expelled the Summer Institute of Linguistics, and 
he adamantly refused to give in to the Reagan administration's de- 
mands to renegotiate the Canal Treaty. 

Two months after Roldos's death, Omar Torrijoss nightmare 
came true; he died in a plane crash. It was July 31, 1981. 



158 



Latin America and the world reeled. Torrijos was known across 
the globe; he was respected as the man who had forced the United 
States to relinquish the Panama Canal to its rightful owners, and 
who continued to stand up to Ronald Reagan. He was a champion of 
human rights, the head of state who had opened his arms to refugees 
across the political spectrum, including the shah of Iran, a charismatic 
voice for social justice who, many believed, would be nominated for 
the Nobel Peace Prize. Now he was dead. "CIA Assassination!" once 
again headlined articles and editorials. 

Graham Greene began his book Getting to Know the General, the 
one that grew out of the trip when I met him at the Hotel Panama, 
with the following paragraph; 

In August 1981, my bag was packed for my fifth visit to 
Panama when the news came to me over the telephone of 
the death of General Omar Torrijos Herrera, my friend 
and host. The small plane in which he was flying to a 
house which he owned at Coclesito in the mountains of 
Panama had crashed, and there were no survivors. A few 
days later the voice of his security guard, Sergeant Chuchu, 
alias Jose de Jesus Martinez, ex-professor of Marxist phi- 
losophy at Panama University, professor of mathematics 
and a poet, told me, "There was a bomb in that plane. I 
know there was a bomb in the plane, but I can't tell you 
why over the telephone." 1 

People everywhere mourned the death of this man who had 
earned a reputation as defender of the poor and defenseless, and 
they clamored for Washington to open investigations into CIA ac- 
tivities. However, this was not about to happen. There were men 
who hated Torrijos, and the list included people with immense power. 
Before his death, he was openly loathed by President Reagan, Vice 
President Bush, Secretary of Defense Weinberger, and the Joint 
Chiefs of Staff, as well as by the CEOs of many powerful corporations. 

The military chiefs were especially incensed by provisions in the 
To rrij os-Carter Treaty that forced them to close the School of the 
Americas and the U.S. Southern Command's tropical warfare center. 
The chiefs thus had a serious problem. Either they had to figure out 



Panama: Another Presidential Death 159 



some way to get around the new treaty; or they needed to find an- 
other country that would be willing to harbor these facilities — an 
unlikely prospect in the closing decades of the twentieth century. Of 
course, there was also another option: dispose of Torrijos and rene- 
gotiate the treaty with his successor. 

Among Torrijos s corporate enemies were the huge multinationals. 
Most had close ties to U.S. politicians and were involved in exploit- 
ing Latin American labor forces and natural resources — oil, lumber, 
tin, copper, bauxite, and agricultural lands. They included manu- 
facturing firms, communications companies, shipping and trans- 
portation conglomerates, and engineering and other technologically 
oriented corporations. 

The Bechtel Group, Inc. was a prime example of the cozy relation- 
ship between private companies and the U.S. government. I knew 
Bechtel well; we at MAIN often worked closely with the company, 
and its chief architect became a close personal friend. Bechtel was the 
United States' most influential engineering and construction company. 
Its president and senior officers included George Shultz and Caspar 
Weinberger, who despised Torrijos because he brazenly courted a 
Japanese plan to replace Panama's existing canal with a new, more 
efficient one. 2 Such a move not only would transfer ownership from 
the United States to Panama but also would exclude Bechtel from 
participating in the most exciting and potentially lucrative engi- 
neering project of the century. 

Torrijos stood up to these men, and he did so with grace, charm, 
and a wonderful sense of humor. Now he was dead, and he had been 
replaced by a protege, Manuel Noriega, a man w r ho lacked Torrijos's 
wit, charisma, and intelligence, and a man who many suspected had 
no chance against the Reagans, Bushes, and Bechtels of the world. 

I was personally devastated by the tragedy. I spent many hours 
reflecting on my conversations with Torrijos. Late one night, I sat for 
a long time staring at his photo in a magazine and recalling my first 
night in Panama, riding in a cab through the rain, stopping before 
his gigantic billboard picture. "Omar's ideal is freedom; the missile 
is not invented that can kill an ideal!" The memory of that inscrip- 
tion sent a shudder through me, even as it had on that stormy night. 

I could not have known back then that Torrijos would collaborate 
with Carter to return the Panama Canal to the people who rightfully 
deserved to own it, or that this victory, along with his attempts to 



160 Part IV: 1981-Present 



reconcile differences between Latin American Socialists and the dic- 
tators, would so infuriate the Reagan-Bush administration that i 
f would seek to assassinate him. 3 I could not have known that on an- 

other dark night he would be killed during a routine flight in his 
Twin Otter, or that most of the world outside the United States would 
have no doubt that Torrijos's death at the age of fifty-two was jusl 
one more in a series of CIA assassinations. 

Had Torrijos lived, he undoubtedly would have sought to quell 
the growing violence that has plagued so many Central and South 
American nations. Based on his record, we can assume that he would 
have tried to work out an arrangement to mitigate international oil 
company destruction of the Amazon regions of Ecuador, Colombia, 
and Peru. One result of such action would be the alleviation of the 
terrible conflicts that Washington refers to as terrorist and drug 
wars, but which Torrijos would have seen as actions taken by des- 
perate people to protect their families and homes. Most importantly, 
I feel certain that he would have served as a role model for a new 
generation of leaders in the Americas, Africa, and Asia — something 
the CIA, the NSA, and the EHMs could not allow. 



Panama: Another Presidential Death 161 



CHAPTER 28 



My Energy Company, Enron, 
and George W. Bush 



At the time of Torrijos's death, I had not seen Paula for several 
months. I was dating other women, including Winifred Grant, a 
young environmental planner I had met at MAIN, and whose father 
happened to be chief architect at Bechtel. Paula was dating a Colom- 
bian journalist. We remained friends but agreed to sever our ro- 
mantic ties. 

I struggled with my job as an expert witness, particularly in justi- 
fying the Seabrook nuclear power plant. It often seemed as though I 
had sold out again, slipping back into an old role simply for the sake 
of money. Winifred was an immense help to me during this period. 
She was an avowed environmentalist, yet she understood the prac- 
tical necessities of providing ever-increasing amounts of electricity. 
She had grown up in the Berkeley area of San Francisco's East Bay 
and had graduated from UC Berkeley. She was a freethinker whose 
views on life contrasted with those of my puritanical parents and 
of Ann. 

Our relationship developed. Winifred took a leave of absence 
from MAIN, and together we sailed my boat down the Atlantic coast 
toward Florida. We took our time, frequently leaving the boat in dif- 
ferent ports so I could fly off to provide expert witness testimony. 
Eventually, we sailed into West Palm Beach, Florida, and rented an 
apartment. We married, and our daughter, Jessica, was born on May 
17, 1982. I was thirty-six, considerably older than all the other men 
who hung out in Lamaze class. 



162 



Part of my job on the Seabrook case was to convince the New 
Hampshire Public Service Commission that nuclear power was the 
best and most economical choice for generating electricity in the state. 
Unfortunately, the longer I studied the issue, the more I began to 
doubt the validity of my own arguments. The literature was constantly 
changing at that time, reflecting a growth in research, and the evi- 
dence increasingly indicated that many alternative forms of energy 
were technically superior and more economical than nuclear power. 

The balance also was beginning to shift away from the old theory 
that nuclear power was safe. Serious questions were being raised 
about the integrity of backup systems, the training of operators, the 
human tendency to make mistakes, equipment fatigue, and the in- 
adequacy of nuclear waste disposal. I personally became uncom- 
fortable with the position I was expected to take —was paid to take 
— under oath in what amounted to a court of law. At the same time, 
I was becoming convinced that some of the emerging technologies 
offered electricity-generating methods that could actually help the 
environment. This was particularly true in the area of generating 
electricity from substances previously considered waste products. 

One day I informed my bosses at the New Hampshire utility com- 
pany that I could no longer testify on their behalf. I gave up this very 
lucrative career and decided to create a company that would move 
some of the new technologies off the drawing boards and put the 
theories into practice. Winifred supported me one hundred percent, 
despite the uncertainties of the venture and the fact that, for the first 
time in her life, she was now starting a family. 

Several months after Jessica's birth in 1982, 1 founded Indepen- 
dent Power Systems (IPS), a company whose mission included devel- 
oping environmentally beneficial power plants and establishing 
models to inspire others to do likewise. It was a high-risk business, 
and most of our competitors eventually failed. However, "coinci- 
dences" came to our rescue. In fact, I was certain that many times 
someone stepped in to help, that I was being rewarded for my past 
service and for my commitment to silence. 

Bruno Zambotti had accepted a high-level position at the Inter- 
American Development Bank. He agreed to serve on the IPS board 
and to help finance the fledgling company. We received backing from 
Bankers Trust; ESI Energy; Prudential Insurance Company; Chad- 
bourne and Parke (a major Wall Street law firm, in which former 



My Energy Company, Enron, and George W. Bush 163 



5 
U.S. senator, presidential candidate, and secretary of slate Ed 
Muskie, was a partner): and Riley Stoker Corporation (an engineer- # 

ing firm, owned by Ashland Oil Company, which designed and built 
highly sophisticated and innovative power plant boilers). We even 
had backing from the U.S. Congress, which singled out IPS for ex- 
emption from a specific tax, and in the process gave us a distinct ad- 
vantage over our competitors. 

In 1986, IPS and Bechtel simultaneously — but independently of 
each other — began construction of power plants that used highly in- 
novative, state-of-the-art technologies for burning waste coal with- 
out producing acid rain. By the end of the decade these two plants 
had revolutionized the utility industry, directly contributing to new 
national antipollution laws by proving once and for all that many so- 
called waste products actually can be converted into electricity, and 
that coal can be burned without creating acid rain, thereby dispelling 
long-standing utility company claims to the contrary. Our plant also 
established that such unproven, state-of-the-art technologies could 
be financed by a small independent company, through Wall Street 
and other conventional means. 1 As an added benefit, the IPS power 
plant sent vented heat to a three and one-half-acre hydroponic 
greenhouse, rather than into cooling ponds or cooling towers. 

My role as IPS president gave me an inside track on the energy 
industry. I dealt with some of the most influential people in the busi- 
ness: lawyers, lobbyists, investment bankers, and high-level execu- 
tives at the major firms. I also had the advantage of a father-in-law 
who had spent over thirty years at Bechtel, had risen to the position 
of chief architect, and now was in charge of building a city in Saudi 
Arabia — a direct result of the work I had done in the early 1970s, 
during the Saudi Arabian Money-laundering Affair. Winifred grew 
up near Bechtel's San Francisco world headquarters and was also a 
member of the corporate family; her first job after graduating from 
UC Berkeley was at Bechtel. 

The energy industry was undergoing major restructuring. The big 
engineering firms were jockeying to take over — or at least to compete 
with — the utility companies that previously had enjoyed the privi- 
leges of local monopolies. Deregulation was the watchword of the day, 
and rules changed overnight. Opportunities abounded for ambitious 
people to take advantage of a situation that baffled the courts and Con- 
gress. Industry pundits dubbed it the "Wild West of Energy" era. 



164 Part IV: 1981-Present 



One casualty of this process was MAIN. As Bruno predicted, Mac 
Hall had lost touch with reality and no one dared tell him so. Paul 
Priddy never asserted control, and MAIN's management not only 
failed to take advantage of the changes sweeping the industry but 
also made a series of fatal mistakes. Only a few years after Bruno de- 
livered record profits, MAIN dropped its EHM role and was in dire 
financial straits. The partners sold MAIN to one of the large engi- 
neering and construction firms that had played its cards right. 

While I had received almost thirty dollars a share for my stock in 
1980, the remaining partners settled for less than half that amount, 
approximately four years later. Thus did one hundred years of proud 
service end in humiliation. I was sad to see the company fold, but I 
felt vindicated that I had gotten out when I did. The MAIN name 
continued under the new ownership for a while, but then it was 
dropped. The logo that had once carried such weight in countries 
around the globe fell into oblivion. 

MAIN was one example of a company that did not cope well in 
the changing atmosphere of the energy industiy. At the opposite end 
of the spectrum was a company we insiders found fascinating: Enron. 
One of the fastest-growing organizations in the business, it seemed 
to come out of nowhere and immediately began putting together 
mammoth deals. Most business meetings open with a few moments 
of idle chatter while the participants settle into their seats, pour 
themselves cups of coffee, and arrange their papers; in those days 
the idle chatter often centered on Enron. No one outside the company 
could fathom how Enron was able to accomplish such miracles. 
Those on the inside simply smiled at the rest of us, and kept quiet. 
Occasionally, when pressed, they talked about new approaches to 
management, about "creative financing," and about their commit- 
ment to hiring executives who knew their way through the corridors 
of power in capitals across the globe. 

To me, this all sounded like a new version of old EHM tech- 
niques. The global empire was marching forward at a rapid pace. 

For those of us interested in oil and the international scene, there 
was another frequently discussed topic: the vice president's son, 
George W. Bush. His first energy company, Arbusto (Spanish for 
bush) was a failure that ultimately was rescued through a 1984 
merger with Spectrum 7 Then Spectrum 7 found itself poised at the 
brink of bankruptcy, and was purchased, in 1986, by Harken Energy 

My Energy Company, Enron, and George W. Bush 165 



Corporation; G. W. Bush was retained as a board member and con- 
sultant with an annual salary of $120, O00. 2 

We all assumed that having a father who was the U.S. vice presi- 
dent factored into this hiring decision, since the younger Bush's 
record of accomplishment as an oil executive certainly did not war- 
rant it. It also seemed no coincidence that Harken took this oppor- 
tunity to branch out into the international field for the first time in 
its corporate history, and to begin actively searching for oil invest- 
ments in the Middle East. Vanity Fair magazine reported, "Once 
Bush took his seat on the board, wonderful things started to happen 
to Harken — new investments, unexpected sources of financing, 
serendipitous drilling rights." 3 

In 1989, Amoco was negotiating with the government of Bahrain 
for offshore drilling rights. Then Vice President Bush was elected 
president. Shortly thereafter, Michael Ameen — a State Department 
consultant assigned to brief the newly confirmed U.S. ambassador to 
Bahrain, Charles Hostler — arranged for meetings between the 
Bahraini government and Harken Energy. Suddenly, Amoco was 
replaced by Harken. Although Harken had not previously drilled out- 
side the southeastern United States, and never offshore, it won exclu- 
sive drilling rights in Bahrain, something previously unheard of in the 
Arab world. Within a few weeks, the price of Harken Energy stock 
increased by over twenty percent, from $4.50 to $5.50 per share. 4 

Even seasoned energy people were shocked by what had hap- 
pened in Bahrain. "I hope G. W. isn't up to something his father will 
pay for," said a lawyer friend of mine who specialized in the energy 
industry and also was a major supporter of the Republican Party. We 
were enjoying cocktails at a bar around the corner from Wall 
Street, high atop the World Trade Center. He expressed dismay. "I 
wonder if it's really worth it," he continued, shaking his head sadly. 
"Is the son's career worth risking the presidency?" 

I was less surprised than my peers, but I suppose I had a unique 
perspective. I had worked for the governments of Kuwait, Saudi 
Arabia, Egypt, and Iran, I was familiar with Middle Eastern politics, 
and I knew that Bush, just like the Enron executives, was part of the 
network I and my EHM colleagues had created; they were the feudal 
lords and plantation masters. 5 



166 Part IV: 1981-Present 



CHAPTER 29 

I Take a Bribe 



During this time in my life, I came to realize that we truly had en- 
tered a new era in world economics. Events set in motion while 
Robert McNamara— the man who had served as one of my models 
— reigned as secretary of defense and president of the World Bank 
had escalated beyond my gravest fears. McNamara's Keynesian- 
inspired approach to economics, and his advocacy of aggressive 
leadership, had become pervasive. The EHM concept had expanded 
to include all manner of executives in a wide variety of businesses. 
They may not have been recruited or profiled by the NSA, but they 
were performing similar functions. 

The only difference now was that the corporate executive EHMs 
did not necessarily involve themselves with the use of funds from the 
international banking community. While the old branch, my branch, 
continued to thrive, the new version took on aspects that were even 
more sinister. During the 1980s, young men and women rose up 
through the ranks of middle management believing that any means 
justified the end: an enhanced bottom line. Global empire was sim- 
ply a pathway to increased profits. 

The new trends were typified by the energy industry, where I 
worked. The Public Utility Regulatory Policy Act (PURPA) was 
passed by Congress in 1978, went through a series of legal challenges, 
and finally became law in 1982. Congress originally envisioned the 
law as a way to encourage small, independent companies like mine 
to develop alternative fuels and other innovative approaches to 



16? 



producing electricity. Under this law, the major utility companies 
were required to purchase energy generated by the smaller compa- 
nies, at fair and reasonable prices. This policy was a result of Carter s 
desire to reduce U.S. dependence on oil — all oil, not just imported 
oil. The intent of the law was clearly to encourage both alternative 
energy sources and the development of independent companies that 
reflected America's entrepreneurial spirit. However, the reality turned 
out to be something very different. 

During the 1980s and into the 1990s, the emphasis switched 
from entrepreneurship to deregulation. I watched as most of the other 
small independents were swallowed up by the large engineering and 
construction firms, and by the public utility companies themselves. 
The latter found legal loopholes that allowed them to create holding 
companies, which could own both the regulated utility companies 
and the unregulated independent energy-producing corporations. 
Many of them launched aggressive programs to drive the independ- 
ents into bankruptcy and then purchase them. Others simply started 
from scratch and developed their own equivalent of the independents. 

The idea of reducing our oil dependence fell by the wayside. Rea- 
gan was deeply indebted to the oil companies; Bush had made his 
own fortune as an oilman. And most of the key players and cabinet 
members in these two administrations were either part of the oil in- 
dustry or were part of the engineering and construction companies 
so closely tied to it. Moreover, in the final analysis, oil and construc- 
tion were not partisan; many Democrats had profited from and were 
beholden to them also. 

IPS continued to maintain a vision of environmentally beneficial 
energy. We were committed to the original PURPA goals, and we 
seemed to lead a charmed life. We were one of the few independents 
that not only survived but also thrived. I have no doubt that the rea- 
son for this was because of my past services to the corporatocracy. 

What was going on in the energy field was symbolic of a trend 
that was affecting the whole world. Concerns about social welfare, 
the environment, and other quality-of-life issues took a backseat to 
greed. In the process, an overwhelming emphasis was placed on pro- 
moting private businesses. At first, this was justified on theoretical 
bases, including the idea that capitalism was superior to and would 
deter communism. Eventually, however, such justification was un- 
needed. It was simply accepted a priori that there was something 



168 Part IV: 1981-Present 



inherently better about projects owned by wealthy investors rather 
than by governments. International organizations such as the World 
Bank bought into this notion, advocating deregulation and privati- 
zation of water and sewer systems, communications networks, utility 
grids, and other facilities that up until then had been managed by 
governments. 

As a result, it w T as easy to expand the EHM concept into the larger 
community, to send executives from a broad spectrum of businesses 
on missions previously reserved for the few of us recruited into an 
exclusive club. These executives fanned out across the planet. They 
sought the cheapest labor pools, the most accessible resources, and 
the largest markets. They were ruthless in their approach. Like 
the EHMs who had gone before them — like me, in Indonesia, in 
Panama, and in Colombia — they found ways to rationalize their 
misdeeds. And like us, they ensnared communities and countries. 
They promised affluence, a way for countries to use the private sec- 
tor to dig themselves out of debt. They built schools and highways, 
donated telephones, televisions, and medical services. In the end, 
however, if they found cheaper workers or more accessible resources 
elsewhere, they left. When they abandoned a community whose 
hopes they had raised, the consequences were often devastating, but 
they apparently did this without a moment's hesitation or a nod to 
their own consciences. 

I had to wonder, though, what all this was doing to their psyches, 
whether they had their moments of doubt, as I had had mine. Did 
they ever stand next to a befouled canal and watch a young woman 
try to bathe while an old man defecated upriver? Were there no 
Howard Parkers left to ask the tough questions? 

Although I enjoyed my IPS successes and my life as a family man, 
I could not fight my moments of severe depression. I was now the fa- 
ther of a young girl, and I feared for the future she would inherit. I 
was weighed down with guilt for the part I had played. 

I also could look back and see a very disturbing historical trend. 
The modern international financial system was created near the end 
of World War II, at a meeting of leaders from many countries, held 
in Bretton Woods, New Hampshire — my home state. The World 
Bank and the International Monetary Fund were formed in order to 
reconstruct a devastated Europe, and they achieved remarkable suc- 
cess. The system expanded rapidly, and it was soon sanctioned by 

I Take a Bribe 169 



every major U.S. ally and hailed as a panacea for oppression. It would, 
we were assured, save us all from the evil clutches of communism. 

But I could not help wondering where all this would lead us. By 
the late 1980s, with the collapse of the Soviet Union and the world 
Communist movement, it became apparent that deterring commu- 
nism was not the goal; it was equally obvious that the global em- 
pire, which was rooted in capitalism, would have free reign. As Jim 
Garrison, president of the State of the World forum, observes: 

Taken cumulatively, the integration of the world as a whole, 
particularly in terms of economic globalization and the 
mythic qualities of "free market" capitalism, represents a 
veritable "empire" in its own right... No nation on earth 
has been able to resist the compelling magnetism of glob- 
alization. Few have been able to escape the "structural 
adjustments" and "conditionalities" of the World Bank, 
the International Monetary Fund, or the arbitrations of 
the World Trade Organization, those international finan- 
cial institutions that, however inadequate, still determine 
what economic globalization means, what the rules are, 
and who is rewarded for submission and punished for 
infractions. Such is the power of globalization that within 
our lifetime we are likely to see the integration, even if 
unevenly, of all national economies in the world into a 
single global, free market system. 1 

As I mulled over these issues, I decided it was time to write a tell- 
all book, Conscience of an Economic Hit Man, but I made no attempt 
to keep the work quiet. Even today, I am not the sort of writer who 
writes in isolation. I find it necessary to discuss the work I am doing. 
I receive inspiration from other people, and I call upon them to help 
me remember and put into perspective events of the past. I like to 
read sections of the materials I am working on to friends, so I may 
hear their reactions. I understand that this may be risky, yet I know 
no other way for me to write. Thus, it was no secret that I was writ- 
ing a book about my time with MAIN. 

One afternoon in 1987, another former MAIN partner contacted 
me and offered me an extremely lucrative consulting contract with 
Stone & Webster Engineering Corporation (SWEC). At that time, 

170 Part IV: 1981-Present 



SWEC was one of the world's premier engineering and construction 
companies, and it was trying to forge a place for itself in the chang- 
ing environment of the energy industry. My contact explained that 
I would report to their new subsidiary, an independent energy- 
development branch modeled after companies like my own IPS. I 
was relieved to learn that I would not be asked to get involved in any 
international or EHM-type projects. 

In fact, he told me, I would not be expected to do very much at all. 
I was one of the few people who had founded and managed a success- 
ful independent energy company, and I had an excellent reputation 
in the industry. SWEC s primary interest was to use my resume and 
to include me on its list of advisers, which was legal and was consistent 
with standard industry practices. The offer was especially attractive 
to me because, due to a number of circumstances, I was considering 
selling IPS. The idea of joining the SWEC stable and receiving a 
spectacular retainer was welcome. 

The day he hired me, the CEO of SWEC took me out to a private 
lunch. We chatted informally for some time, and as we did so I real- 
ized that a side of me was eager to get back into the consulting busi- 
ness, to leave behind the responsibilities of running a complicated 
energy company, of being responsible for over a hundred people 
when we were constructing a facility, and of dealing with all the lia- 
bilities associated with building and operating power plants. I had 
already envisioned how I would spend the substantial retainer I 
knew he was about to offer me. I had decided to use it, among other 
things, to create a nonprofit organization. 

Over dessert, my host brought up the subject of the one book I 
had already published, The Stress-Free Habit. He told me he had heard 
wonderful things about it. Then he looked me squarely in the eye. 
"Do you intend to write any more books?" he asked. 

My stomach tightened. Suddenly, I understood what this was all 
about. I did not hesitate. "No," I said. "I don't intend to try to publish 
any more books at this time." 

"I'm glad to hear that," he said. "We value our privacy at this com- 
pany. Just like at MAIN." 

"I understand that." 

He sat back and, smiling, seemed to relax. "Of course, books like 
your last one, about dealing with stress and such things, are perfectly 
acceptable. Sometimes they can even further a man's career. As a 

I Take a Bribe 171 



consultant to SWEC, you are perfectly free to publish that sort of 
thing." He looked at me as though expecting a response. 

"That's good to know." 

"Yes, perfectly acceptable. However, it goes without saying that 
you'll never mention the name of this company in your books, and 
that you will not write about anything that touches on the nature of 
our business here or the work you did at MAIN. You will not mention 
political subjects or any dealings with international banks and devel- 
opment projects." He peered at me. "Simply a matter of confidentiality." 

"It goes without saying," I assured him. For an instant, my heart 
seemed to stop beating. An old feeling returned, similar to ones I 
had experienced around Howard Parker in Indonesia, while driving 
through Panama City beside Fidel, and while sitting in a Colombian 
coffee shop with Paula. I was selling out — again. This was not a 
bribe in the legal sense — it was perfectly aboveboard and legitimate 
for this company to pay to include my name on their roster, to call 
upon me for advice or to show up at a meeting from time to time, 
but I understood the real reason I was being hired. 

He offered me an annual retainer that was equivalent to an exec- 
utive's salary. 

Later that afternoon I sat in an airport, stunned, waiting for my 
flight back to Florida. I felt like a prostitute. Worse than that, I felt 
I had betrayed my daughter, my family, and my country. And yet, I 
told myself, I had little choice. I knew that if I had not accepted this 
bribe, the threats would have followed. 



172 Part IV: 1981-Present 



CHAPTER 30 

The United States Invades Panama 



Torrijos was dead, but Panama continued to hold a special place in 
my heart. Living in South Florida, I had access to many sources of 
information about current events in Central America. Torrijos's 
legacy lived on, even if it was filtered through people who were not 
graced with his compassionate personality and strength of character. 
Attempts to settle differences throughout the hemisphere continued 
after his death, as did Panamas determination to force the United 
States to live up to the terms of the Canal Treaty. 

Torrijos's successor, Manuel Noriega, at first appeared committed 
to following in his mentor's footsteps. I never met Noriega person- 
ally, but by all accounts, he initially endeavored to further the cause 
of Latin America's poor and oppressed. One of his most important 
projects was the continued exploration of prospects for building a 
new canal, to be financed and constructed by the Japanese. Pre- 
dictably, he encountered a great deal of resistance from Washington 
and from private U.S. companies. As Noriega himself writes: 

Secretary of State George Shultz was a former executive 
of the multinational construction company Bechtel; 
Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger had been a Bechtel 
vice president. Bechtel would have liked nothing better 
than to earn the billions of dollars in revenue that canal 
construction would generate... The Reagan and Bush 
administrations feared the possibility that Japan might 



173 



1 

dominate an eventual canal construction project; not 
only was there a misplaced concern about security, there 
was also the question of commercial rivalry. U.S. con- 
struction firms stood to lose billions of dollars. 1 I! 

But Noriega was no Torrijos. He did not have his former boss's 
charisma or integrity. Over time, he developed an unsavory reputa- 
tion for corruption and drug dealing, and was even suspected of ar- 
ranging the assassination of a political rival, Hugo Spadafora. 

Noriega built his reputation as a colonel heading up the Pana- 
manian Defense Forces' G-2 unit, the military intelligence command 
that was the national liaison with the CIA. In this capacity, he de- 
veloped a close relationship with CIA Director William J. Casey. The 
CIA used this connection to further its agenda throughout the Carib- 
bean and Central and South America. For example, when the Reagan 
administration wanted to give Castro advance warning of the 1983 
U.S. invasion of Grenada, Casey turned to Noriega, asking him to 
serve as messenger. The colonel also helped the CIA infiltrate Colom- 
bian and other drug cartels. 

By 1984, Noriega had been promoted to general and commander 
in chief of the Panamanian Defense Forces. It is reported that when 
Casey arrived in Panama City that year and was met at the airport by 
the local CIA chief, he asked, "Where's my boy? Where's Noriega?" 
When the general visited Washington, the two men met privately at 
Casey's house. Many years later, Noriega would admit that his close 
bond with Casey made him feel invincible. He believed that the CIA, 
like G-2, was the strongest branch of its country's government. He 
was convinced that Casey would protect him, despite Noriega's stance 
on the Panama Canal Treaty and U.S. Canal Zone military bases. 2 

Thus, while Torrijos had been an international icon for justice 
and equality, Noriega became a symbol of corruption and decadence. 
His notoriety in this regard was assured when, on June 12, 1986, the 
New York Times ran a front-page article with the headline, "Panama 
Strongman Said to Trade in Drugs and Illicit Money." The expose, 
written by a Pulitzer Prize-winning reporter, alleged that the general 
was a secret and illegal partner in several Latin American busi- 
nesses; that he had spied on and for both the United States and Cuba, 
acting as a sort of double agent; that G-2. under his orders, had in 



174 Part IV: 1981-Present 



fact beheaded Hugo Spadafora; and that Noriega had personally 
directed "the most significant drug running in Panama." This article 
was accompanied by an unflattering portrait of the general, and a 
follow-up the next day included more details. 3 

Compounding his other problems, Noriega was also saddled 
with a U.S. president who suffered from an image problem, what 
journalists referred to as George H. W. Bush's "wimp factor." 4 This 
took on special significance when Noriega adamantly refused to 
consider a fifteen-year extension for the School of the Americas. The 
general's memoirs provide an interesting insight: 

As determined and proud as we were to follow through 
with Torrijos's legacy, the United States didn't want any 
of this to happen. They wanted an extension or a renego- 
tiation for the installation [School of the Americas], 
saying that with their growing war preparations in Cen- 
tral America, they still needed it. But that School of the 
Americas was an embarrassment to us. We didn't want a 
training ground for death squads and repressive right- 
wing militaries on our soil. 5 

Perhaps, therefore, the world should have anticipated it, but in 
fact the world was stunned when, on December 20, 1989, the United 
States attacked Panama with what was reported to be the largest air- 
borne assault on a city since World War II. G It was an unprovoked 
attack on a civilian population. Panama and her people posed ab- 
solutely no threat to the United States or to any other country. Politi- 
cians, governments, and press around the world denounced the 
unilateral U.S. action as a clear violation of international law. 

Had this military operation been directed against a country that 
had committed mass murder or other human rights crimes — Pino- 
chet's Chile, Stroessner's Paraguay, Somosa's Nicaragua, D'Aubuissoris 
El Salvador, or Saddam's Iraq, for example — the world might have 
understood. But Panama had done nothing of the sort; it had merely 
dared to defy the wishes of a handful of powerful politicians and cor- 
porate executives. It had insisted that the Canal Treaty be honored, 
it had held discussions with social reformers, and it had explored 
the possibility of building a new canal with Japanese financing and 



The United States Invades Panama 175 



construction companies. As a result, it suffered devastating conse- 
quences. As Noriega puts it: 

I want to make it very clear: the destabilization campaign 
launched by the United States in 1986, ending with the 
1989 Panama invasion, was a result of the U.S. rejection 
of any scenario in which future control of the Panama 
Canal might be in the hands of an independent, sover- 
eign Panama— supported by Japan... Shultz and Wein- 
berger, meanwhile, masquerading as officials operating 
in the public interest and basking in popular ignorance 
about the powerful economic interests they represented, 
were building a propaganda campaign to shoot me 
down." 

Washington's stated justification for the attack was based on one 
man. The United States' sole rationale for sending its young men 
and women to risk their lives and consciences killing innocent peo- 
ple, including untold numbers of children, and setting fire to huge 
sections of Panama City, was Noriega. He was characterized as evil, 
as the enemy of the people, as a drug-trafficking monster, and as 
such he provided the administration with an excuse for the massive 
invasion of a country with two million inhabitants — which coinci- 
dentally happened to sit on one of the most valuable pieces of real 
estate in the world. 

I found the invasion disturbing to the point of driving me into a 
depression that lasted many days. I knew that Noriega had body- 
guards, yet I could not help believing that the jackals could have 
taken him out, as they had Roldos and Torrijos. Most of his body- 
guards, I suspected, had been trained by U.S. military personnel and 
probably could have been paid either to look the other way or to 
carry out an assassination themselves. 

The more I thought and read about the invasion, therefore, the 
more convinced I became that it signaled a U.S. policy turn back 
toward the old methods of empire building, that the Bush adminis- 
tration was determined to go one better than Reagan and to demon- 
strate to the world that it would not hesitate to use massive force in 
order to achieve its ends. It also seemed that the goal in Panama, in 
addition to replacing the Torrijos legacy with a puppet administration 

176 Part IV: 1981-Present 



favorable to the United States, was to frighten countries like Iraq into 
submission. 

David Harris, a contributing editor at the New York Times Mag- 
azine and the author of many books, has an interesting observation. 
In his 2001 book Shooting the Moon, he states: 

Of all the thousands of rulers, potentates, strongmen, 
juntas, and warlords the Americans have dealt with in all 
corners of the world, General Manuel Antonio Noriega is 
the only one the Americans came after like this. Just once 
in its 225 years of formal national existence has the 
United States ever invaded another country and carried 
its ruler back to the United States to face trial and im- 
prisonment for violations of American law committed on 
that ruler's own native foreign turf. 8 

Following the bombardment, the United States suddenly found 
itself in a delicate situation. For a while, it seemed as though the 
whole thing would backfire. The Bush administration might have 
quashed the wimp rumors, but now it faced the problem of legiti- 
macy, of appearing to be a bully caught in an act of terrorism. It was 
disclosed that the U.S. Army had prohibited the press, the Red Cross, 
and other outside observers from entering the heavily bombed areas 
for three days, while soldiers incinerated and buried the casualties. 
The press asked questions about how much evidence of criminal and 
other inappropriate behavior was destroyed, and about how many 
died because they were denied timely medical attention, but such 
questions were never answered. 

We shall never know many of the facts about the invasion, nor 
shall we know the true extent of the massacre. Defense Secretary 
Richard Cheney claimed a death toll between five hundred and six 
hundred, but independent human rights groups estimated it at three 
thousand to five thousand, with another twenty-five thousand left 
homeless. 9 Noriega was arrested, flown to Miami, and sentenced to 
forty years' imprisonment; at that time, he was the only person in 
the United States officially classified as a prisoner of war. 10 

The world was outraged by this breach of international law and 
by the needless destruction of a defenseless people at the hands of 
the most powerful military force on the planet, but few in the United 

The United States Invades Panama 177 



States were aware of either the outrage or the crimes Washington 
had committed. Press coverage was very limited. A number of fac- 
tors contributed to this, including government policy, White House 
phone calls to publishers and television executives, congresspeople 
who dared not object, lest the wimp factor become their problem, 
and journalists who thought the public needed heroes rather than 
objectivity. 

One exception was Peter Eisner, a Newsday editor and Associated 
Press reporter who covered the Panama invasion and continued to 
analyze it for many years. In The Memoirs of Manuel Noriega: Amer- 
ica's Prisoner, published in 1997, Eisner writes: 

The death, destruction and injustice wrought in the 
name of fighting Noriega— and the lies surrounding that 
event —were threats to the basic American principles of 
democracy... Soldiers were ordered to kill in Panama and 
they did so after being told they had to rescue a country 
from the clamp of a cruel, depraved dictator; once they 
acted, the people of their country (the U.S.) marched 
lockstep behind them. 11 

After lengthy research, including interviews with Noriega in his 
Miami prison cell, Eisner states: 

On the key points, I do not think the evidence shows 
Noriega was guilty of the charges against him. I do not 
think his actions as a foreign military leader or a sover- 
eign head of state justify the invasion of Panama or that 
he represented a threat to U.S. national security. 12 

Eisner concludes: 

My analysis of the political situation and my reporting in 
Panama before, during, and after the invasion brought 
me to the conclusion that the U.S. invasion of Panama 
was an abominable abuse of power. The invasion princi- 
pally served the goals of arrogant American politicians 
and their Panamanian allies, at the expense of uncon- 
scionable bloodshed. 13 



178 Part IV: 1981-Present 



The Arias family and the pre-Torrijos oligarchy, which had served 
as U.S. puppets from the time when Panama was torn from Colom- 
bia until Torrijos took over, were reinstated. The new Canal Treaty 
became a moot point. In essence, Washington once again con- 
trolled the waterway, despite anything the official documents said. 

As I reflected on those incidents and all that I had experienced 
while working for MAIN, I found myself asking the same questions 
over and over: How many decisions — including ones of great his- 
torical significance that impact millions of people — are made hy- 
men and women who are driven by personal motives rather than by 
a desire to do the right thing? How many of our top government of- 
ficials are driven by personal greed instead of national loyalty? How 
many wars are fought because a president does not want his con- 
stituents to perceive him as a wimp? 

Despite my promises to SWEC's president, my frustration and 
feelings of impotence about the Panama invasion prodded me into 
resuming work on my book, except now I decided to focus on Torrijos. 
I saw his stoiy as a way to expose many of the injustices that infect 
our world, and as a way to rid myself of my guilt. This time, however, 
I was determined to keep silent about what I was doing, rather than 
seeking advice from friends and peers. 

As I worked on the book, I was stunned by the magnitude of what 
we EHMs had accomplished, in so many places. I tried to concen- 
trate on a few countries that stood out, but the list of places where I 
had worked and which were worse off afterward was astounding. I 
also was horrified by the extent of my own corruption. I had done a 
great deal of soul searching, yet I realized that while I was in the 
midst of it I had been so focused on my daily activities that I had not 
seen the larger perspective. Thus, when I was in Indonesia I fretted 
over the things Howard Parker and I discussed, or the issues raised 
by Rasy's young Indonesian friends. While I was working in Panama, 
I was deeply affected by the implications of what I had seen during 
Fidel's introduction of the slums, the Canal Zone, and the disco- 
theque. In Iran, my conversations with Yamin and Doc troubled me 
immensely. Now, the act of writing this book gave me an overview. I 
understood how easy it had been not to see the larger picture and 
therefore to miss the true significance of my actions. 

How simple this sounds, and how self-evident; yet, how insidious 
the nature of these experiences. For me it conjures the image of a 

The United States Invades Panama 179 



soldier. In the beginning, he is naive. He may question the morality 
of killing other people, but mostly he has to deal with his own fear, 
has to focus on survival. After he kills his first enemy, he is over- 
whelmed with emotions. He may wonder about the family of the 
dead man and feel a sense of remorse. But as time goes on and he 
participates in more battles, kills more people, he becomes hard- 
ened. He is transformed into a professional soldier. 

I had become a professional soldier. Admitting that fact opened 
the door for a better understanding of the process by which crimes 
are committed and empires are built. I could now comprehend why 
so many people have committed atrocious acts — how, for example, 
good, family-loving Iranians could work for the shah's brutal secret 
police, how good Germans could follow the orders of Hitler, how 
good American men and women could bomb Panama City. 

As an EHM, I never drew a penny directly from the NSA or any 
other government agency; MAIN paid my salary. I was a private cit- 
izen, employed by a private corporation. Understanding this helped 
me see more clearly the emerging role of the corporate executive-as- 
EHM. A whole new class of soldier was emerging on the world scene, 
and these people were becoming desensitized to their own actions. 
I wrote: 

Today, men and women are going into Thailand, the 
Philippines, Botswana, Bolivia, and every other country 
where they hope to find people desperate for work. They 
go to these places with the express purpose of exploiting 
wretched people — people whose children are severely 
malnourished, even starving, people who live in shanty- 
towns and have lost all hope of a better life, people who 
have ceased to even dream of another day. These men 
and women leave their plush offices in Manhattan or San 
Francisco or Chicago, streak across continents and 
oceans in luxurious jetliners, check into first-class hotels, 
and dine at the finest restaurants the country has to offer. 
Then they go searching for desperate people. 

Today, we still have slave traders. They no longer find 
it necessary to march into the forests of Africa looking for 
prime specimens who will bring top dollar on the auction 



180 Part IV: 1981-Present 



blocks in Charleston, Cartagena, and Havana. They sim- 
ply recruit desperate people and build a factory to pro- 
duce the jackets, blue jeans, tennis shoes, automobile 
parts, computer components, and thousands of other 
items they can sell in the markets of their choosing. Or 
they may elect not even to own the factory themselves; 
instead, they hire a local businessman to do all their dirty 
work for them. 

These men and women think of themselves as upright. 
They return to their homes with photographs of quaint 
sites and ancient ruins, to show to their children. They 
attend seminars where they pat each other on the back 
and exchange tidbits of advice about dealing with the ec- 
centricities of customs in far-off lands. Their bosses hire 
lawyers who assure them that what they are doing is per- 
fectly legal. They have a cadre of psychotherapists and 
other human resource experts at their disposal to con- 
vince them that they are helping those desperate people. 

The old-fashioned slave trader told himself that he 
was dealing with a species that was not entirely human, 
and that he was offering them the opportunity to become 
Christianized. He also understood that slaves were fun- 
damental to the survival of his own society, that they 
were the foundation of his economy. The modern slave 
trader assures himself (or herself) that the desperate 
people are better off earning one dollar a day than no 
dollars at all, and that they are receiving the opportunity 
to become integrated into the larger world community. 
She also understands that these desperate people are 
fundamental to the survival of her company, that they are 
the foundation for her own lifestyle. She never stops to 
think about the larger implications of what she, her 
lifestyle, and the economic system behind them are doing 
to the world — or of how they may ultimately impact her 
children's future. 



The United States Invades Panama 181 



CHAPTER 31 

An EHM Failure in Iraq 



My role as president of IPS in the 1980s, and as a consultant to 
SWEC in the late 1980s and throughout much of the 1990s, gave me 
access to information about Iraq that was not available to most people. 
Indeed, during the 1980s the majority of Americans knew little 
about the country. It simply was not on their radar screen. However, 
I was fascinated by what was going on there. 

I kept in touch with old friends who worked for the World Bank, 
USAID, the IMF, or one of the other international financial organi- 
zations, and with people at Bechtel, Halliburton, and the other major 
engineering and construction companies, including my own father- 
in-law. Many of the engineers employed by IPS subcontractors and 
other independent power companies were also involved in projects 
in the Middle East. I was very aware that the EHMs were hard at 
work in Iraq. 

The Reagan and Bush administrations were determined to turn 
Iraq into another Saudi Arabia. There were many compelling rea- 
sons for Saddam Hussein to follow the example of the House of 
Saud. He had only to observe the benefits they had reaped from the 
Money-laundering Affair. Since that deal was struck, modern cities 
had risen from the Saudi desert, Riyadh's garbage-collecting goats 
had been transformed into sleek trucks, and now the Saudis enjoyed 
the fruits of some of the most advanced technologies in the world: 
state-of-the-art desalinization plants, sewage treatment systems, 
communications networks, and electric utility grids. 



182 



Saddam Hussein undoubtedly was aware that the Saudis also en- 
joyed special treatment when it came to matters of international law. 
Their good friends in Washington turned a blind eye to many Saudi 
activities, including the financing of fanatical groups — many of 
which were considered by most of the world to be radicals bordering 
on terrorism — and the harboring of international fugitives. In fact, 
the United States actively sought and received Saudi Arabian finan- 
cial support for Osama bin Laden's Afghan war against the Soviet 
Union. The Reagan and Bush administrations not only encouraged 
the Saudis in this regard, but also they pressured many other coun- 
tries to do the same — or at least to look the other way. 

The EHM presence in Baghdad was very strong during the 
1980s. They believed that Saddam eventually would see the light, 
and I had to agree with this assumption. After all, if Iraq reached an 
accord with Washington similar to that of the Saudis, Saddam could 
basically write his own ticket in ruling his country, and might even 
expand his circle of influence throughout that part of the world. 

It hardly mattered that he was a pathological tyrant, that he had 
the blood of mass murders on his hands, or that his mannerisms and 
brutal actions conjured images of Adolph Hitler. The United States 
had tolerated and even supported such men many times before. We 
would be happy to offer him U.S. government securities in exchange 
for petrodollars, for the promise of continued oil supplies, and for a 
deal whereby the interest on those securities was used to hire U.S. 
companies to improve infrastructure systems throughout Iraq, to 
create new cities, and to turn the deserts into oases. We would be will- 
ing to sell him tanks and fighter planes and to build him chemical 
and nuclear power plants, as we had done in so many other countries, 
even if these technologies could conceivably be used to produce ad- 
vanced weaponry. 

Iraq was extremely important to us, much more important than 
was obvious on the surface. Contrary to common public opinion, 
Iraq is not simply about oil. It is also about water and geopolitics. 
Both the Tigris and Euphrates rivers flow through Iraq; thus, of all 
the countries in that part of the world, Iraq controls the most im- 
portant sources of increasingly critical water resources. During the 
1980s, the importance of water — politically as well as economically— 
was becoming obvious to those of us in the energy and engineering 
fields. In the rush toward privatization, many of the major companies 

An EHM Failure in Iraq 183 



that had set their sights on taking over the small independent power 
companies now looked toward privatizing water systems in Africa, 
Latin America, and the Middle East. 

In addition to oil and water, Iraq is situated in a very strategic lo- 
cation. It borders Iran, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, Jordan, Syria, and 
Turkey, and it has a coastline on the Persian Gulf. It is within easy 
missile-striking distance of both Israel and the former Soviet Union. 
Military strategists equate modern Iraq to the Hudson River valley 
during the French and Indian War and the American Revolution. In 
the eighteenth century, the French, British, and Americans knew 
that whoever controlled the Hudson River valley controlled the con- 
tinent. Today, it is common knowledge that whoever controls Iraq 
holds the key to controlling the Middle East. 

Above all else, Iraq presented a vast market for American tech- 
nology and engineering expertise. The fact that it sits atop one of the 
world's most extensive oil fields (by some estimates, even greater 
than Saudi Arabia's) assured that it was in a position to finance huge 
infrastructure and industrialization programs. All the major players 
— engineering and construction companies; computer systems sup- 
pliers; aircraft, missile, and tank manufacturers; and pharmaceutical 
and chemical companies — were focused on Iraq. 

However, by the late 1980s it was apparent that Saddam was not 
buying into the EHM scenario. This was a major frustration and a 
great embarrassment to the first Bush administration. Like Panama, 
Iraq contributed to George H. W. Bush's wimp image. As Bush 
searched for a way out, Saddam played into his hands. In August 
1990, he invaded the oil-rich sheikhdom of Kuwait. Bush responded 
with a denunciation of Saddam for violating international law, even 
though it had been less than a year since Bush himself had staged 
the illegal and unilateral invasion of Panama. 

It was no surprise, when the president finally ordered an all-out 
military attack. Five hundred thousand U.S. troops were sent in as 
part of an international force. During the early months of 1991, an 
aerial assault was launched against Iraqi military and civilian tar- 
gets. It was followed by a one hundred-hour land assault that routed 
the outgunned and desperately inferior Iraqi army. Kuwait was safe. 
A true despot had been chastised, though not brought to justice. 
Bush's popularity ratings soared to 90 percent among the American 
people. 

184 Part IV: 1981-Present 



I was in Boston attending meetings at the time of the Iraq inva- 
sion — one of the few occasions when I was actually asked to do 
something for SWEC. I vividly recall the enthusiasm that greeted 
Bush's decision. Naturally, people throughout the Stone & Webster 
organization were excited, though not only because we had taken a 
stand against a murderous dictator. For them, a U.S. victory in Iraq 
offered possibilities for huge profits, promotions, and raises. 

The excitement was not limited to those of us in businesses that 
would directly benefit from war. People across the nation seemed al- 
most desperate to see our country reassert itself militarily. I believe 
there were many reasons for this attitude, including the philosoph- 
ical change that occurred when Reagan defeated Carter, the Iranian 
hostages were released, and Reagan announced his intention to 
renegotiate the Panama Canal Treaty. Bush's invasion of Panama 
stirred the already smoldering flames. 

Beneath the patriotic rhetoric and the calls for action, however, 
I believe a much more subtle transformation was occurring in the 
way U.S. commercial interests — and therefore most of the people 
who worked for American corporations — viewed the world. The 
march toward global empire had become a reality in which much of 
the country participated. The dual ideas of globalization and priva- 
tization were making significant inroads into our psyches. 

In the final analysis, this was not solely about the United States. 
The global empire had become just that; it reached across all bor- 
ders. What we had previously considered U.S. coiporations were now 
truly international, even from a legal standpoint. Many of them were 
incorporated in a multitude of countries; they could pick and choose 
from an assortment of rules and regulations under which to conduct 
their activities, and a multitude of globalizing trade agreements and 
organizations made this even easier. Words like democracy, social- 
ism, and capitalism were becoming almost obsolete. Corporatocracy 
had become a fact, and it increasingly exerted itself as the single ma- 
jor influence on world economies and politics. 

In a strange turn of events, I succumbed to the corporatocracy 
when I sold IPS in November 1990. It was a lucrative deal for my 
partners and me, but we sold out mainly because Ashland Oil Com- 
pany put tremendous pressure on us. I knew from experience that 
fighting them would be extremely costly in many ways, while selling 
would make us wealthy. However, it did strike me as ironic that an 

An EHM Failure in Iraq 185 



oil company would became the new owners of my alternative energy 
company; part of me felt like a traitor. 

SWEC demanded very little of my time. Occasionally, I was asked 
to fly to Boston for meetings or to help prepare a proposal. I was 
sometimes sent to places like Rio de Janeiro, to hobnob with the 
movers and shakers there. Once, I flew to Guatemala on a private jet. 
I frequently called project managers to remind them that I was on 
the payroll and available. Receiving all that money for doing so very 
little rubbed at my conscience. I knew the business well and wanted to 
contribute something useful. But it simply was not on the agenda. 

The image of being a man in the middle haunted me. I wanted to 
take some action that would justify my existence and that might turn 
all the negatives of my past into something positive. I continued to 
work surreptitiously — and very irregularly — on Conscience of an 
Economic Hit Man, and yet I did not deceive myself into believing 
that it would ever be published. 

In 1991, 1 began guiding small groups of people into the Amazon 
to spend time with and learn from the Shuars, who were eager to 
share their knowledge about environmental stewardship and indige- 
nous healing techniques. During the next few years, the demand for 
these trips increased rapidly and resulted in the formation of a non- 
profit organization, Dream Change Coalition. Dedicated to changing 
the way people from industrialized countries see the earth and our 
relationship to it, Dream Change developed a following around the 
world and empowered people to create organizations with similar 
missions in many countries. TIME magazine selected it as one of 
thirteen organizations whose Web sites best reflect the ideals and 
goals of Earth Day. 1 

Throughout the 1990s, I became increasingly involved in the 
nonprofit world, helping to create several organizations and serving 
on the board of directors of others. Many of these grew out of the 
work of highly dedicated people at Dream Change and involved 
working with indigenous people in Latin America— the Shuars and 
Achuars of the Amazon, the Quechuas of the Andes, the Mayas in 
Guatemala — or teaching people in the United States and Europe 
about these cultures. SWEC approved of this philanthropic work; it 
was consistent with SWEC's own commitment to the United Way. I 
also wrote more books, always careful to focus on indigenous teach- 
ings and to avoid references to my EHM activities. Besides alleviating 



186 Part IV: 1981-Present 



my boredom, these measures helped me keep in touch with Latin 
America and the political issues that were dear to me. 

But try as I might to convince myself that my nonprofit and writ- 
ing activities provided a balance, that I was making amends for my 
past activities, I found this increasingly difficult. In my heart, I knew 
I was shirking my responsibilities to my daughter. Jessica was in- 
heriting a world where millions of children are born saddled with 
debts they will never be able to repay. And I had to accept responsi- 
bility for it. 

My books grew in popularity, especially one titled, The World Is 
As You Dream It. Its success led to increasing demands for me to 
give workshops and lectures. Sometimes, standing in front of an au- 
dience in Boston or New York or Milan, I was struck by the irony. If 
the world is as you dream it, why had I dreamed such a world? How 
had I managed to play such an active role in manifesting such a 
nightmare? 

In 1997, 1 was commissioned to teach a weeklong Omega Insti- 
tute workshop in the Caribbean, at a resort on St. John Island. I 
arrived late at night. When I awoke the next morning, I walked onto 
a tiny balcony and found myself looking out at the very bay where, 
seventeen years earlier, I had made the decision to quit MAIN. I col- 
lapsed into a chair, overcome with emotion. 

Throughout the week, I spent much of my free time on that bal- 
cony, looking down at Leinster Bay, trying to understand my feelings. 
I came to realize that although I had quit, I had not taken the next 
step, and that my decision to remain in the middle was exacting a 
devastating toll. By the end of the week, I had concluded that the world 
around me was not one that I wanted to dream, and that I needed to 
do exactly what I was instructing my students to do: to change my 
dreams in ways that reflected what I really wanted in my life. 

When I returned home, I gave up my corporate consulting prac- 
tice. The president of SWEC who had hired me was now retired. A 
new man had come aboard, one who was younger than me and was 
apparently unconcerned about me telling my story. He had initiated 
a cost-cutting program and was happy not to have to pay me that ex- 
orbitant retainer any longer. 

I decided to complete the book I had been working on for so long, 
and just making the decision brought a wonderful sense of relief. I 
shared my ideas about writing with close friends, mostly people in 



An EHM Failure in Iraq 187 



the nonprofit world who were involved with indigenous cultures and 
rain forest preservation. To my surprise, they were dismayed. They 
feared that speaking out would undermine my teaching work and 
jeopardize the nonprofit organizations I supported. Many of us were 
helping Amazon tribes protect their lands from oil companies; com- 
ing clean, I was told, could undermine my credibility, and might set 
back the whole movement. Some even threatened to withdraw 
their support. 

So, once again, I stopped writing. Instead, I focused on taking 
people deep into the Amazon, showing them a place and a tribe that 
are mostly untouched by the modern world. In fact, that is where I 
was on September 11, 2001. 



188 Part IV: 1981-Present 



CHAPTER 32 



September 11 and its Aftermath 
for Me, Personally 



On September 10, 2001, I was traveling down a river in the 
Ecuadorian Amazon with Shakaim Chumpi, the coauthor of my book 
Spirit of the Shuar. We were leading a group of sixteen North Amer- 
icans to his community deep in the rain forest. The visitors had come 
to learn about his people and to help them preserve their precious 
rain forests. 

Shakaim had fought as a soldier in the recent Ecuador-Peru con- 
flict. Most people in the major oil-consuming nations have never 
heard about this war, yet it was fought primarily to provide them 
with oil. Although the border between these two countries was dis- 
puted for many years, only recently did a resolution become urgent. 
The reason for the urgency was that the oil companies needed to 
know with which country to negotiate in order to win concessions 
for specific tracts of the oil-rich lands. Borders had to be defined. 

The Shuars formed Ecuador's first line of defense. They proved 
themselves to be ferocious fighters, often overcoming superior num- 
bers and better-equipped forces. The Shuars did not know anything 
about the politics behind the war or that its resolution would open 
the door to oil companies. They fought because they come from a 
long tradition of warriors and because they were not about to allow 
foreign soldiers onto their lands. 

As we paddled down the river, watching a flock of chattering parrots 
fly overhead, I asked Shakaim whether the truce was still holding. 



189 



"Yes," he said, "but I'm afraid I must tell you that we are now 
preparing to go to war with you." He went on to explain that, of 
course, he did not mean me personally or the people in our group. 
"You are our friends," he assured me. He was, he said, referring to 
our oil companies and to the military forces that would come into 
his jungle to defend them. 

"We've seen what they did to the Huaorani tribe. They destroyed 
their forests, polluted the rivers, and killed many people, including 
children. Today, the Huaorani hardly exist as a people anymore. We 
won't let that happen to us. We won't allow oil companies into our 
territory, any more than we would the Peruvians. We have all sworn 
to fight to the last man." 1 

That night our group sat around a fire in the center of a beautiful 
Shuar longhouse built from split bamboo slats placed in the ground 
and covered with a thatched roof. I told them about my conversation 
with Shakaim. We all wondered how many other people in the world 
felt similarly about our oil companies and our country. How many, 
like the Shuars, were terrified that we would come into their lives 
and destroy their culture and their lands? How many hated us? 

The next morning, I went down to the little office where we kept 
our two-way radio. I needed to arrange for pilots to fly in and pick us 
up in a few days. As I was talking with them, I heard a shout. 

"My God!" the man on the other end of the radio exclaimed. "New 
York is under attack." He turned up the commercial radio that had 
been playing music in the background. During the next half hour, we 
received a minute-by-minute account of the events unfolding in the 
United States. Like everyone else, it was a moment I shall never forget. 

When I returned to my home in Florida, I knew I had to visit 
Ground Zero, the former site of the World Trade Center towers, so I 
arranged to fly to New York. I checked into my uptown hotel in early 
afternoon. It was a sunny November day, unseasonably balmy. I 
strolled along Central Park, filled with enthusiasm, then headed for 
a part of the city where once I had spent a lot of time, the area near 
Wall Street now known as Ground Zero. 

As I approached, my enthusiasm was replaced with a sense of 
horror. The sights and smells were overwhelming — the incredible 
destruction; the twisted and melted skeletons of those once-great 
buildings; the debris; the rancid odor of smoke, charred ruins, and 



190 Part IV: 1981-Present 



burnt flesh. I had seen it all on TV, but being here was different 

I had not been prepared for this — especially not for the people. 
Two months had passed and still they stood around, those who lived 
or worked nearby, those who had survived. An Egyptian man was loi- 
tering outside his small shoe repair shop, shaking his head in disbelief. 

"Can't get used to it," he muttered. "I lost many customers, many 
friends. My nephew died up there." He pointed at the blue sky. "I 
think I saw him jump. I don't know... So many were jumping, hold- 
ing hands and flapping their arms as though they could fly." 

It came as a surprise, the way people talked with one another. In 
New York City. And it went beyond language. Their eyes met. Al- 
though somber, they exchanged looks of compassion, half-smiles 
that spoke more than a million words. 

But there was something else, a sense about the place itself. At 
first, I couldn't figure it out; then it struck me: the light. Lower Man- 
hattan had been a dark canyon, back in the days when I made the 
pilgrimage to this part of town to raise capital for IPS, when I used 
to plot strategy with my investment bankers over dinner at Windows 
on the World. You had to go that high, to the top of the World Trade 
Center, if you wanted to see light. Now, here it was at street level. 
The canyon had been split wide open, and we who stood on the 
street beside the ruins were warmed by the sunshine. I couldn't help 
wondering if the view of the sky, of the light, had helped people open 
their hearts. I felt guilty just thinking such thoughts. 

I turned the corner at Trinity Church and headed down Wall 
Street. Back to the old New York, enveloped in shadow. No sky, no 
light. People hurried along the sidewalk, ignoring one another. A cop 
screamed at a stalled car. 

I sat down on the first steps I came to, at number fourteen. From 
somewhere, the sounds of giant fans or an air blower rose above the 
other noises. It seemed to come from the massive stone wall of the 
New York Stock Exchange building. I watched the people. They hus- 
tled up and down the street, leaving their offices, hurrying home, or 
heading to a restaurant or bar to discuss business. A few walked in 
tandem and chatted with each other. Most, though, were alone and 
silent. I tried to make eye contact; it didn't happen. 

The wail of a car alarm drew my attention down the street. A man 
rushed out of an office and pointed a key at the car; the alarm went 



September 11 and its Aftermath for Me, Personally 1.91 



silent. I sat there quietly for a few long moments. After a while, I 
reached into my pocket and pulled out a neatly folded piece of paper 
covered with statistics. 

Then I saw him. He shuffled along the street, staring down at his 
feet. He had a scrawny gray beard and wore a grimy overcoat that 
looked especially out of place on this warm afternoon on Wall Street. 
I knew he was Afghan. 

He glanced at me. Then, after only a second of hesitation, he 
started up the steps. He nodded politely and sat down beside me, 
leaving a yard or two between us. From the way he looked straight 
ahead, I realized it would be up to me to begin the conversation. 

"Nice afternoon." 

"Beautiful." His accent was thick. "Times like these, we want sun- 
shine." 

"You mean because of the World Trade Center?" 

He nodded. 

"You're from Afghanistan?" 

He stared at me. "Is it so obvious?" 

"I've traveled a lot. Recently, I visited the Himalayas, Kashmir." 

"Kashmir." He pulled at his beard. "Fighting." 

"Yes, India and Pakistan, Hindus and Muslims. Makes you won- 
der about religion, doesn't it?" 

His eyes met mine. They were deep brown, nearly black. They 
struck me as wise and sad. He turned back toward the New York 
Stock Exchange building. With a long gnarled finger, he pointed at 
the building. 

"Or maybe," I agreed, "it's about economics, not religion." 

"You were a soldier?" 

I couldn't help but chuckle. "No. An economic consultant." I 
handed him the paper with the statistics. "These were my weapons." 

He reached over and took them. "Numbers." 

"World statistics." 

He studied the list, then gave a little laugh. "I can't read." He 
handed it back to me. 

"The numbers tell us that twenty-four thousand people die every 
day from hunger." 

He whistled softly, then took a moment to think about this, and 
sighed. "I was almost one of them. I had a little pomegranate farm 
near Kandahar. Russians arrived and mujahideen hid behind trees 

192 Part IV: 1981-Present 



and in water ditches." He raised his hands and pointed them like a 
rifle. "Ambushing." He lowered his hands. "All my trees and ditches 
were destroyed." 

'After that, what did you do?" 

He nodded at the list I held. ''Does it show beggars?" 

It did not, but I thought I remembered. "About eighty million in 
the world, I believe." 

"I was one." He shook his head, seemed lost in thought. We sat in 
silence for a few minutes before he spoke again. "I do not like beg- 
garing. My child dies. So I raise poppies." 

"Opium?" 

He shrugged. "No trees, no water. The only way to feed our families." 

I felt a lump in my throat, a depressing sense of sadness com- 
bined with guilt. "We call raising opium poppies evil, yet many of our 
wealthiest people owe their fortunes to the drug trade." 

His eyes met mine and seemed to penetrate my soul. "You were a 
soldier," he stated, nodding his head to confirm this simple fact. 
Then he rose slowly to his feet and hobbled down the steps. I wanted 
him to stay, but I felt powerless to say anything. I managed to get to 
my feet and start after him. At the bottom of the steps I was stopped 
by a sign. It included a picture of the building where I had been seated. 
At the top. it notified passersby that the sign had been erected by 
Heritage Trails of New York. It said: 

The Mausoleum of Halicarnassus piled on top of the bell 
tower of St. Mark's in Venice, at the corner of Wall and 
Broad — that's the design concept behind 14 Wall Street. 
In its day the world's tallest bank building, the 539-foot- 
high skyscraper originally housed the headquarters of 
Bankers Trust, one of the country's wealthiest financial 
institutions. 

I stood there in awe and looked up at this building. Shortly after 
the turn of the last century, 14 Wall Street had played the role the 
World Trade Center would later assume; it had been the very symbol 
of power and economic domination. It had also housed Bankers 
Trust, one of the firms I had employed to finance my energy com- 
pany. It was an essential part of my heritage — the heritage, as the old 
Afghan man so aptly put it, of a soldier. 

That I had ended up here this day, talking with him, seemed an 

September 11 and its Aftermath for Me, Personally 193 



odd coincidence. Coincidence. The word stopped me. I thought about 
how our reactions to coincidences mold our lives. How should I re- 
act to this one? 

Continuing to walk, I scanned the heads in the crowd, but I could 
find no sign of him. At the next building, there was an immense 
statue shrouded in blue plastic. An engraving on the building's stone 
face revealed that this was Federal Hall, 26 Wall Street, where on 
April 30, 1789, George Washington had taken the oath of office as 
first president of the United States. This was the exact spot where 
the first man given the responsibility to safeguard life, liberty, and 
the pursuit of happiness for all people was sworn in. So close to 
Ground Zero; so close to Wall Street. 

I went on around the block, to Pine Street. There I came face-to- 
face with the world headquarters of Chase, the bank David Rocke- 
feller built, a bank seeded with oil money and harvested by men like 
me. This bank, an institution that served the EHMs and that was a 
master at promoting global empire, was in many ways the very sym- 
bol of the corporatocracy. 

I recalled reading that the World Trade Center was a project 
started by David Rockefeller in I960, and that in recent years the 
complex had been considered an albatross. It had the reputation of 
being a financial misfit, unsuited to modern fiber-optic and Internet 
technologies, and burdened with an inefficient and costly elevator 
system. Those two towers once had been nicknamed David and Nel- 
son. Now the albatross was gone. 

I kept walking, slowly, almost reluctantly. Despite the warmth of 
the afternoon, I felt a chill, and I realized that a strange anxiousness, 
a foreboding, had taken hold of me. I could not identify its source 
and I tried to brush it off, picking up my pace. I eventually found 
myself once again looking at that smoldering hole, the twisted metal, 
that great scar in the earth. I leaned against a building that had es- 
caped the destruction and stared into the pit. I tried to imagine the 
people rushing out of the collapsing tower and the firefighters dashing 
in to help them. I tried to think about the people who had jumped, 
the desperation they felt. But none of these things came to me. 

Instead, I saw Osama bin Laden accepting money, and weapons 
worth millions of dollars, from a man employed by a consulting 
company under contract to the United States government. Then I 
saw myself sitting at a computer with a blank screen. 

1.94 Part IV: 1981-Present 



I looked around, away from Ground Zero, at the New York 
streets that had avoided the fire and now were returning to normal. 
I wondered what the people who walked those streets today thought 
about all this — not simply about the destruction of the towers, but 
also about the ruined pomegranate farms and the twenty-four 
thousand who starve every single day. I wondered if they thought 
about such things at all, if they could tear themselves away from 
their jobs and gas-guzzling cars and their interest payments long 
enough to consider their own contribution to the world they were 
passing on to their children. I wondered what they knew about Af- 
ghanistan — not the Afghanistan on television, the one littered with 
U.S. military tents and tanks, but the old man's Afghanistan. I won- 
dered what those twenty-four thousand who die every day think. 

And then I saw myself again, sitting before a blank computer 
screen. 

I forced my attention back to Ground Zero. At the moment, one 
thing was certain: my country was thinking about revenge, and it was 
focusing on countries like Afghanistan. But I was thinking about all 
the other places in the world where people hate our companies, our 
military, our policies, and our march toward global empire. 

I wondered, What about Panama, Ecuador, Indonesia, Iran, 
Guatemala, most of Africa? 

I pushed myself off the wall I had been leaning against and 
started walking away. A short, swarthy man was waving a newspaper 
in the air and shouting in Spanish. I stopped. 

"Venezuela on the brink of revolution!" he yelled above the noise 
of the traffic, the honking horns, and the milling people. 

I bought his paper and stood there for a moment scanning the 
lead article. It was about Hugo Chavez, Venezuela's democratically 
elected, anti-American president, and the undercurrent of hatred 
generated by U.S. policies in Latin America. 

What about Venezuela? 



September 11 and its Aftermath for Me, Personally 195 



CHAPTER 33 

Venezuela: Saved by Saddam 



I had watched Venezuela for many years. It was a classic example of 
a country that rose from rags to riches as a result of oil. It was also a 
model of the turmoil oil wealth foments, of the disequilibrium be- 
tween rich and poor, and of a country shamelessly exploited by the 
corporatocracy. It had become the epitome of a place where old-style 
EHMs like me converged with the new-style, corporate version. 

The events I read about in the newspaper that day at Ground 
Zero were a direct result of the 1998 elections, when the poor and 
disenfranchised of Venezuela elected Hugo Chavez by a landslide as 
their president. 1 He immediately instituted drastic measures, taking 
control of the courts and other institutions and dissolving the Vene- 
zuelan Congress. He denounced the United States for its "shameless 
imperialism," spoke out forcefully against globalization, and introduced 
a hydrocarbons law that was reminiscent, even in name, to the one 
Jaime Roldos had brought to Ecuador shortly before his airplane 
went down. The law doubled the royalties charged to foreign oil com- 
panies. Then Chavez defied the traditional independence of the 
state-owned oil company, Petroleos de Venezuela, by replacing its 
top executives with people loyal to him. 2 

Venezuelan oil is crucial to economies around the world. In 2002 
the nation was the world's fourth-largest oil exporter and the number- 
three supplier to the United States. 3 Petroleos de Venezuela, with 
forty thousand employees and $50 billion a year in sales, provides 
80 percent of the country's export revenue. It is by far the most 



196 



important factor in Venezuela's economy.* By taking over the indus- 
try, Chavez had thrust himself onto the world stage as a major player. 

Many Venezuelans saw this as destiny; the completion of a process 
that began eighty years earlier. On December 14, 1922, a huge oil 
blowout had gushed from the earth near Maracaibo. One hundred 
thousand barrels of crude sprayed into the air each day for the next 
three days, and this single geologic event changed Venezuela forever. 
By 1930, the country was the world's largest oil exporter. Venezue- 
lans looked to oil as a solution to all their problems. 

Oil revenues during the next forty years enabled Venezuela to 
evolve from one of the most impoverished nations in the world to 
one of the wealthiest in Latin America. All of the country's vital sta- 
tistics improved: health care, education, employment, longevity, and 
infant survival rates. Businesses prospered. 

During the 1973 OPEC oil embargo, petroleum prices skyrock- 
eted and Venezuela's national budget quadrupled. The EHMs went 
to work. The international banks flooded the country with loans that 
paid for vast infrastructure and industrial projects and for the 
highest skyscrapers on the continent. Then, in the 1980s, the corpo- 
rate-style EHMs arrived. It was an ideal opportunity for them to cut 
their fledgling teeth. The Venezuelan middle class had become siz- 
able, and provided a ripe market for a vast array of products, yet 
there was still a very large poor sector available to labor in the sweat- 
shops and factories. 

Then oil prices crashed, and Venezuela could not repay its debts. 
In 1989, the IMF imposed harsh austerity measures and pressured 
Caracas to support the corporatocracy in many other ways. Vene- 
zuelans reacted violently; riots killed over two hundred people. The 
illusion of oil as a bottomless source of support was shattered. Between 
1978 and 2003, Venezuela's per capita income plummeted by over 
40 percent. 5 

As poverty increased, resentment intensified. Polarization re- 
sulted, with the middle class pitted against the poor. As so often occurs 
in countries whose economies depend on oil production, demo- 
graphics radically shifted. The sinking economy took its toll on the 
middle class, and many fell into the ranks of the poor. 

The new demographics set the stage for Chavez — - and for conflict 
with Washington. Once in power, the new president took actions 

Venezuela: Saved by Saddam 197 



that challenged the Bush administration. Just before the September 
11 attacks, Washington was considering its options. The EHMs had 
failed; was it time to send in the jackals? 

Then 9/11 changed all priorities. President Bush and his advisers 
focused on rallying the world community to support U.S. activities in 
Afghanistan and an invasion of Iraq. On top of that, the U.S. econ- 
omy was in the middle of a recession. Venezuela was relegated to a 
back burner. However, it was obvious that at some point Bush and 
Chavez would come to blows. With Iraqi and other Middle Eastern 
oil supplies threatened, Washington could not afford to ignore 
Venezuela for long. 

Wandering around Ground Zero and Wall Street, meeting the old 
Afghan man, and reading about Chavez's Venezuela brought me to a 
point I had avoided for many years, and it forced me to take a hard 
look at the consequences of the things I had done over the past three 
decades. I could not possibly deny the role I had played or the fact 
that my work as an EHM now affected my daughter's generation in 
very negative ways. I knew I could no longer postpone taking action 
to atone for what I had done. I had to come clean about my life, in 
a manner that would help people wake up to the fact of corpora- 
tocracy and understand why so much of the world hates us. 

I started writing once again, but as I did so, it seemed to me that 
my story was too old. Somehow, I needed to bring it up to date. I 
considered traveling to Afghanistan, Iraq, and Venezuela and writing 
a contemporary commentary on those three countries. They seemed 
to embody an irony of current world affairs : each had undergone 
traumatic political turmoil and ended up with leaders who left a 
great deal to be desired (a cruel and despotic Taliban, a psychopathic 
Saddam, and an economically inept Chavez), yet in no case did the 
corporatocracy respond by attempting to solve the deeper problems of 
these countries. Rather, the response was simply to undermine leaders 
who stood in the way of our oil policies. In many respects, Venezuela 
was the most intriguing case because, while military intervention 
had already occurred in Afghanistan and appeared inevitable in Iraq, 
the administration's response to Chavez remained a mystery. As far 
as I was concerned, the issue was not about whether Chavez was a 
good leader; it was about Washington's reaction to a leader who 
stood in the way of the corporatocracy 's march to global empire. 



198 Part IV: 1981-Present 



Before I had time to organize such a trip, however, circumstances 
once again intervened. My nonprofit work took me to South America 
several times in 2002. A Venezuelan family whose businesses were go- 
ing bankrupt under the Chavez regime joined one of my trips to the 
Amazon. We became close friends, and I heard their side of the story. 
I also met with Latin Americans from the other end of the economic 
spectrum, who considered Chavez a savior. The events unfolding in 
Caracas were symptomatic of the world we EHMs had created. 

By December 2002, the situation in both Venezuela and in Iraq 
reached crisis points. The two countries were evolving into perfect 
counterpoints for each other. In Iraq, all the subtle efforts — both the 
EHMs and the jackals — had failed to force Saddam to comply, and 
now we were preparing for the ultimate solution, invasion. In Vene- 
zuela, the Bush administration was bringing Kermit Roosevelt's 
Iranian model into play. As the New York Times reported, 

Hundreds of thousands of Venezuelans filled the streets 
here today to declare their commitment to a national 
strike, now in its 28th day, to force the ouster of Presi- 
dent Hugo Chavez. 

The strike, joined by an estimated 30,000 oil workers, 
threatens to wreak havoc on this nation, the world's fifth- 
largest oil producer, for months to come... 

In recent days, the strike has reached a kind of stale- 
mate. Mr. Chavez is using nonstriking workers to try to 
normalize operations at the state-owned oil company. 
His opponents, led by a coalition of business and labor 
leaders, contend, though, that their strike will push the 
company, and thus the Chavez government, to collapse. 6 

This was exactly how the CIA brought down Mossadegh and re- 
placed him with the shah. The analogy could not have been stronger. 
It seemed history was uncannily repeating itself, fifty years later. 
Five decades, and still oil was the driving force. 

Chavez's supporters continued to clash with his opponents. Sev- 
eral people, it was reported, were shot to death and dozens more 
were wounded. The next day, I talked with an old friend who for 
many years had been involved with the jackals. Like me, he had 



Venezuela: Saved by Saddam 199 



never worked directly for any government, but he had led clandes- 
tine operations in many countries. He told me that a private con- 
tractor had approached him to foment strikes in Caracas and to 
bribe military officers — many of whom had been trained at the 
School of the Americas — to turn against their elected president. He 
had turned down the offer, but he confided, "The man who took the 
job knows what he's doing."" 7 

Oil company executives and Wall Street feared a rise in oil prices 
and a decline in American inventories. Given the Middle East situ- 
ation, I knew the Bush administration was doing everything in its 
power to overthrow Chavez. Then came the news that they had suc- 
ceeded; Chavez had been ousted. The New York Times took this turn 
of events as an opportunity to provide a historical perspective — and 
also to identify the man who appeared to play the Kermit Roosevelt 
role in contemporary Venezuela: 

The United States... supported authoritarian regimes 
throughout Central and South America during and after 
the Cold War in defense of its economic and political 
interests. 

In tiny Guatemala, the Central Intelligence Agency 
mounted a coup overthrowing the democratically elected 
government in 1954, and it backed subsequent right- 
wing governments against small leftist rebel groups for 
four decades. Roughly 200,000 civilians died. 

In Chile, a CIA-supported coup helped put Gen. 
Augusto Pinochet in power from 1973 to 1990. In Peru, 
a fragile democratic government is still unraveling the 
agency's role in a decade of support for the now-deposed 
and disgraced president, Alberto K. Fujimori, and his 
disreputable spy chief, Vladimiro L. Montesinos. 

The United States had to invade Panama in 1989 to 
topple its narco-dictator, Manuel A. Noriega, who, for 
almost 20 years, was a valued informant for American 
intelligence. And the struggle to mount an unarmed 
opposition against Nicaragua's leftists in the 1980s by 
any means necessary, including selling arms to Iran for 
cold cash, led to indictments against senior Reagan 
administration officials. 



200 Part IV: 1981-Present 



Among those investigated back then was Otto J. Reich, 
a veteran of Latin American struggles. No charges were 
ever filed against Mr. Reich. He later became United States 
Ambassador to Venezuela and now serves as assistant sec- 
retary of state for inter- American affairs by presidential ap- 
pointment. The fall of Mr. Chavez is a feather in his cap. 8 

If Mr. Reich and the Bush administration were celebrating the 
coup against Chavez, the party was suddenly cut short. In an amaz- 
ing turnabout. Chavez regained the upper hand and was back in 
power less than seventy-two hours later. Unlike Mossadegh in Iran, 
Chavez had managed to keep the military on his side, despite all at- 
tempts to turn its highest-ranking officers against him. In addition, 
he had the powerful state oil company on his side. Petroleos de 
Venezuela defied the thousands of striking workers and made a 
comeback. 

Once the dust cleared, Chavez tightened his government's grip on 
oil company employees, purged the military of the few disloyal offi- 
cers who had been persuaded to betray him, and forced many of his 
key opponents out of the country. He demanded twenty-year prison 
terms for two prominent opposition leaders, Washington-connected 
operatives who had joined the jackals to direct the nationwide strike. 9 

In the final analysis, the entire sequence of events was a calamity 
for the Bush administration. As the Los Angeles Times reported, 

Bush administration officials acknowledged Tuesday that 
they had discussed the removal of Venezuelan President 
Hugo Chavez for months with military and civilian lead- 
ers from Venezuela... The administration's handling of 
the abortive coup has come under increasing scrutiny. 10 

It was obvious that not only had the EHMs failed, but so had the 
jackals. Venezuela in 2003 turned out to be very different from Iran 
in 1953. 1 wondered if this was a harbinger or simply an anomaly— 
and what Washington would do next. 

At least for the time being, I believe a serious crisis was averted in 
Venezuela — and Chavez was saved — by Saddam Hussein. The Bush 
administration could not take on Afghanistan, Iraq, and Venezuela 
all at once. At the moment, it had neither the military muscle nor the 

Venezuela: Saved bv Saddam 201 



political support to do so. I knew, however, that such circumstances 
could change quickly, and that President Chavez was likely to face 
fierce opposition in the near future. Nonetheless, Venezuela was a 
reminder that not much had changed in fifty years — except the out- 
come. 



202 Part IV: 1981-Present 



CHAPTER 34 

Ecuador Revisited 



Venezuela was a classic case. However, as I watched events unfold- 
ing there, I was struck by the fact that the truly significant battle 
lines were being drawn in yet another country. They were significant 
not because they represented more in terms of dollars or human lives, 
but because they involved issues that went far beyond the materialis- 
tic goals that generally define empires. These battle lines extended 
beyond the armies of bankers, business executives, and politicians, 
deep into the soul of modern civilization. And they were being es- 
tablished in a country I had come to know and love, the one where 
I had first worked as a Peace Corps volunteer: Ecuador. 

In the years since I first went there, in 1968, this tiny country had 
evolved into the quintessential victim of the corporatocracy. My con- 
temporaries and I, and our modern corporate equivalents, had 
managed to bring it to virtual bankruptcy. We loaned it billions of 
dollars so it could hire our engineering and construction firms to 
build projects that would help its richest families. As a result, in 
those three decades, the official poverty level grew from 50 to 70 per- 
cent, under- or unemployment increased from 15 to 70 percent, pub- 
lic debt increased from $240 million to $16 billion, and the share of 
national resources allocated to the poorest citizens declined from 20 
percent to 6 percent. Today, Ecuador must devote nearly 50 percent 
of its national budget simply to paying off its debts — instead of to 
helping the millions of its citizens who are officially classified as dan- 
gerously impoverished. 1 



203 



The situation in Ecuador clearly demonstrates that this was not 
the result of a conspiracy; it was a process that had occurred during 
both Democratic and Republican administrations, a process that 
had involved all the major multinational banks, many corporations, 
and foreign aid missions from a multitude of countries. The United 
States played the lead role, but we had not acted alone. 

During those three decades, thousands of men and women par- 
ticipated in bringing Ecuador to the tenuous position it found itself 
in at the beginning of the millennium. Some of them, like me, had 
been aware of what they were doing, but the vast majority had 
merely performed the tasks they had been taught in business, engi- 
neering, and law schools, or had followed the lead of bosses in my 
mold, who demonstrated the system by their own greedy example 
and through rewards and punishments calculated to perpetuate it. 
Such participants saw the parts they played as benign, at worst; in 
the most optimistic view, they were helping an impoverished nation. 

Although unconscious, deceived, and — in many cases — self- 
deluded, these players were not members of any clandestine conspir- 
acy; rather, they were the product of a system that promotes the 
most subtle and effective form of imperialism the world has ever wit- 
nessed. No one had to go out and seek men and women who could be 
bribed or threatened — they had already been recruited by companies, 
banks, and government agencies. The bribes consisted of salaries, 
bonuses, pensions, and insurance policies; the threats were based on 
social mores, peer pressure, and unspoken questions about the fu- 
ture of their children's education. 

The system had succeeded spectacularly. By the time the new 
millennium rolled in, Ecuador was thoroughly entrapped. We had 
her, just as a Mafia don has the man whose daughter's wedding and 
small business he has financed and then refinanced. Like any good 
Mafiosi, we had taken our time. We could afford to be patient, know- 
ing that beneath Ecuador's rain forests lies a sea of oil, knowing that 
the proper day would come. 

That day had already arrived when, in early 2003, I wound my 
way from Quito to the jungle town of Shell in my Subaru Outback. 
Chavez had reestablished himself in Venezuela. He had defied George 
W. Bush and had won. Saddam was standing his ground and was 
preparing to be invaded. Oil supplies were depleted to their lowest 
level in nearly three decades, and the prospects of taking more from 



204- Part IV: 1981-Present 



our prime sources looked bleak — and therefore, so did the health of 
the corporatocracy's balance sheets. We needed an ace in the hole. It 
was time to cut away our Ecuadorian pound of flesh. 

As I drove past the monster dam on the Pastaza River, I realized 
that here in Ecuador the battle was not simply the classic struggle 
between the rich of the world and the impoverished, between those 
who exploit and the exploited. These battle lines would ultimately 
define who we are as a civilization. We were poised to force this tiny 
country to open its Amazon rain forests to our oil companies. The 
devastation that would result was immeasurable. 

If we insisted on collecting the debt, the repercussions would go 
far beyond our abilities to quantify them. It was not just about the 
destruction of indigenous cultures, human lives, and hundreds of 
thousands of species of animals, reptiles, fish, insects, and plants, 
some of which might contain the undiscovered cures to any number 
of diseases. It was not just that rain forests absorb the deadly green- 
house gases produced by our industries, give off the oxygen that is 
essential to our lives, and seed the clouds that ultimately create a 
large percentage of the world's fresh water. It went beyond all the 
standard arguments made by ecologists for saving such places, and 
reached deep into our souls. 

If we pursued this strategy, we would continue an imperialist pat- 
tern that had begun long before the Roman Empire. We decry slavery, 
but our global empire enslaves more people than the Romans and all 
the other colonial powers before us. I wondered how we could execute 
such a shortsighted policy in Ecuador and still live with our collec- 
tive conscience. 

Peering through the window of the Subaru at the deforested 
slopes of the Andes, an area that during my Peace Corps days had 
been lush with tropical growth, I was suddenly surprised by another 
realization. It dawned on me that this view of Ecuador as a signifi- 
cant battle line was purely personal, that in fact every country where 
I had worked, every country with resources coveted by the empire, 
was equally significant. I had my own attachment to this one, which 
stemmed from those days back in the late 1960s when I lost my in- 
nocence here. However, it was subjective, my personal bias. 

Though the Ecuadorian rain forests are precious, as are the in- 
digenous people and all the other life forms that inhabit them, they 
are no more precious than the deserts of Iran and the Bedouins of 

Ecuador Revisited 205 



Yamin's heritage. No more precious than the mountains of Java, the 
seas oti'the coast of the Philippines, the steppes of Asia, the savannas 
of Africa, the forests of North America, the icecaps of the Arctic, or 
hundreds of other threatened places. Every one of these represents 
a battle line, and every one of them forces us to search the depths of 
our individual and collective souls. 

I was reminded of a statistic that sums it all up: The income ratio 
of the one-fifth of the world's population in the wealthiest countries 
to the one-fifth in the poorest countries went from 30 to 1 in i960 to 
74 to 1 in 1995. 2 And the World Bank, the U.S. Agency for Interna- 
tional Development, the IMF, and the rest of the banks, corporations, 
and governments involved in international "aid" continue to tell us 
that they are doing their jobs, that progress has been made. 

So here I was in Ecuador again, in the country that was just one 
of many battle lines but that holds a special place in my heart. It was 
2003, thirty-five years after I had first arrived as a member of a 
U.S. organization that bears the word peace in its name. This time, I 
had come in order to try to prevent a war that for three decades I had 
helped to provoke. 

It would seem that events in Afghanistan, Iraq, and Venezuela 
might be enough to deter us from another conflict; yet, in Ecuador 
the situation was very different. This war would not require the U.S. 
Army, for it would be fought by a few thousand indigenous warriors 
equipped only with spears, machetes, and single-shot, muzzle-loaded 
rifles. They would face off against a modern Ecuadorian army, a 
handful of U.S. Special Forces advisers, and jackal-trained merce- 
naries hired by the oil companies. This would be a war, like the 1995 
conflict between Ecuador and Peru, that most people in the United 
States would never hear about, and recent events had escalated the 
probability of such a war. 

In December 2002, oil company representatives accused an in- 
digenous community of taking a team of its workers hostage; they 
suggested that the warriors involved were members of a terrorist 
group, with implications of possible ties to al-Qaeda. It was an issue 
made especially complicated because the oil company had not received 
government permission to begin drilling. However, the company 
claimed its workers had the right to perform preliminary, non- 
drilling investigations — a claim vehemently disputed by the indige- 
nous groups a few days later, when they shared their side of the story. 

206 Part IV: 1981-Present 



The oil workers, tribal representatives insisted, had trespassed on 
lands where they were not allowed: the warriors had carried no 
weapons, nor had they threatened the oil workers with violence of 
any sort. In fact, they had escorted the workers to their village, where 
they offered them food and chicha, a local beer. While their visitors 
feasted, the warriors persuaded the workers' guides to paddle away. 
However, the tribe claimed, the workers were never held against 
their will; they were free to go wherever they pleased. 3 

Driving down that road, I remembered what the Shuars had told 
me in 1990 when, after selling IPS, I returned to offer to help them 
save their forests. "The world is as you dream it," they had said, and 
then pointed out that we in the North had dreamed of huge indus- 
tries, lots of cars, and gigantic skyscrapers. Now we had discovered 
that our vision had in fact been a nightmare that would ultimately 
destroy us all. 

"Change that dream," the Shuars had advised me. Yet here it was, 
more than a decade later, and despite the w T ork of many people and 
nonprofit organizations, including the ones I had worked with, the 
nightmare had reached new and horrifying proportions. 

When my Outback finally pulled into the jungle town of Shell, I 
was hustled off to a meeting. The men and women who attended 
represented many tribes : Kichwa, Shuar, Achuar, Shiwiar, and Za- 
paro. Some had walked for days through the jungle, others had flown 
in on small planes, funded by nonprofits. A few wore their traditional 
kilts, face paint, and feathered headbands, though most attempted 
to emulate the townspeople, wearing slacks, T-shirts, and shoes. 

Representatives from the community accused of taking hostages 
spoke first. They told us that shortly after the workers returned to 
the oil company, over a hundred Ecuadorian soldiers arrived in their 
small community. They reminded us that this was at the beginning 
of a special season in the rain forests, the fruiting of the chonta. A 
tree sacred to indigenous cultures, its fruit comes but once a year 
and signals the start of the mating season for many of the region's 
birds, including rare and endangered species. As they flock to it, the 
birds are extremely vulnerable. The tribes enforce strict policies 
forbidding the hunting of these birds during chonta season. 

"The timing of the soldiers couldn't have been worse," a woman 
explained. I felt her pain and that of her companions as they told 
their tragic stories about how the soldiers ignored the prohibitions. 

Ecuador Revisited 207 



They shot down the birds for sport and for food. In addition, they 
raided family gardens, banana groves, and manioc fields, often ir- 
reparably destroying the sparse topsoil. They used explosives in the 
rivers for fishing, and they ate family pets. They confiscated the local 
hunters' guns and blowguns, dug improper latrines, polluted the 
rivers with fuel oil and solvents, sexually molested women, and ne- 
glected to properly dispose of garbage, which attracted insects and 
vermin. 

"We had two choices," a man said. "We could fight, or we could 
swallow our pride and do our best to repair the damage. We decided 
it was not yet the time to fight." He described how they had attempted 
to compensate for the military's abuses by encouraging their own 
people to go without food. He called it a fast, but in fact it sounded 
closer to voluntary starvation. Old people and children became mal- 
nourished and grew sick. 

They spoke about threats and bribes. "My son," a woman said, 
"speaks English as well as Spanish and several indigenous dialects. 
He worked as a guide and translator for an ecotourist company. 
They paid him a decent salary. The oil company offered him ten 
times as much. What could he do? Now he writes letters denouncing 
his old company and all the others who come to help us, and in his 
letters calls the oil companies our friends," She shook her body, like 
a dog shaking off water. "He is no longer one of us. My son..." 

An elderly man wearing the traditional toucan-feather headdress 
of a shaman stood up. "You know about those three we elected to 
represent us against the oil companies, who died in that plane crash? 
Well, I'm not going to stand here and tell you what so many say, that 
the oil companies caused the crash. But I can tell you that those three 
deaths dug a big hole in our organization. The oil companies lost no 
time filling that hole with their people." 

Another man produced a contract and read it. In exchange for 
three hundred thousand dollars, it ceded a vast territory over to a 
lumber company. It was signed by three tribal officials. 

"These aren't their real signatures," he said. "I ought to know; one is 
my brother. It's another type of assassination. To discredit our leaders." 

It seemed ironic and strangely appropriate that this was taking 
place in a region of Ecuador where the oil companies had not yet 
been given permission to drill. They had drilled in many areas 
around this one, and the indigenous people had seen the results, had 

208 Part IV: 1981-Present 



witnessed the destruction of their neighbors. As I sat there listening, 
I asked myself how the citizens of my country would react if gather- 
ings like this were featured on CNN or the evening news. 

The meetings were fascinating and the revelations deeply disturbing. 
But something else also happened, outside the formal setting of 
those sessions. During breaks, at lunch, and in the evening, when I 
talked with people privately, I frequently was asked why the United 
States was threatening Iraq. The impending war was discussed on 
the front pages of Ecuadorian newspapers that made their way into 
this jungle town, and the coverage was very different from coverage 
in the States. It included references to the Bush family's ownership 
of oil companies and United Fruit, and to Vice President Cheney's 
role as former CEO of Halliburton. 

These newspapers were read to men and women who had never 
attended school. Everyone seemed to take an interest in this issue. 
Here I was, in the Amazon rain forest, among illiterate people many 
in North America consider "backward," even "savages," and yet prob- 
ing questions were being asked that struck at the heart of the global 
empire. 

Driving out of Shell, back past the hydroelectric dam and high 
into the Andes, I kept thinking about the difference between what I 
had seen and heard during this visit to Ecuador and what I had be- 
come accustomed to in the United States. It seemed that Amazonian 
tribes had a great deal to teach us, that despite all our schooling and 
our many hours reading magazines and watching television news, 
we lacked an awareness they had somehow found. This line of think- 
ing made me think of "The Prophecy of the Condor and Eagle," which 
I have heard many times throughout Latin America, and of similar 
prophecies I have encountered around the world. 

Nearly every culture I know prophesies that in the late 1990s we 
entered a period of remarkable transition. At monasteries in the Hi- 
malayas, ceremonial sites in Indonesia, and indigenous reservations 
in North America, from the depths of the Amazon to the peaks of the 
Andes and into the ancient Mayan cities of Central America, I have 
heard that ours is a special moment in human history, and that each 
of us was born at this time because we have a mission to accomplish. 

The titles and words of the prophecies differ slightly. They tell 
variously of a New Age, the Third Millennium, the Age of Aquarius, 
the Beginning of the Fifth Sun, or the end of old calendars and the 

Ecuador Revisited 209 



commencement of new ones. Despite the varying terminologies, 
however, they have a great deal in common, and "The Prophecy of 
the Condor and Eagle" is typical. It states that back in the mists of 
history, human societies divided and took two different paths: that 
of the condor (representing the heart, intuitive and mystical) and 
that of the eagle (representing the brain, rational and material). In 
the 1490s, the prophecy said, the two paths would converge and the 
eagle would drive the condor to the verge of extinction. Then, five 
hundred years later, in the 1990s, a new epoch would begin, one in 
which the condor and eagle will have the opportunity to reunite and 
fly together in the same sky, along the same path. If the condor and 
eagle accept this opportunity, they will create a most remarkable off- 
spring, unlike any ever seen before. 

"The Prophecy of the Condor and Eagle" can be taken at many 
levels — the standard interpretation is that it foretells the sharing 
of indigenous knowledge with the technologies of science, the bal- 
ancing of yin and yang, and the bridging of northern and southern 
cultures. However, most powerful is the message it offers about con- 
sciousness; it says that we have entered a time when we can benefit 
from the many diverse ways of seeing ourselves and the world, and 
that we can use these as a springboard to higher levels of awareness. 
As human beings, we can truly wake up and evolve into a more con- 
scious species. 

The condor people of the Amazon make it seem so obvious that if 
we are to address questions about the nature of what it is to be human 
in this new millennium, and about our commitment to evaluating 
our intentions for the next several decades, then we need to open our 
eyes and see the consequences of our actions — the actions of the 
eagle — in places like Iraq and Ecuador. We must shake ourselves 
awake. We who live in the most powerful nation history has ever 
known must stop worrying so much about the outcome of soap op- 
eras, football games, quarterly balance sheets, and the daily Dow 
Jones averages, and must instead reevaluate who we are and where 
we want our children to end up. The alternative to stopping to ask 
ourselves the important questions is simply too dangerous. 



210 Part IV: 1981-Present 



CHAPTER 35 

Piercing the Veneer 



Shortly after I returned home from Ecuador in 2003, the United 
States invaded Iraq for the second time in a little over a decade. The 
EHMs had failed. The jackals had failed. So young men and women 
were sent to kill and die among the desert sands. One important 
question the invasion raised, but one that I figured few Americans 
would be in a position to consider, was what this would mean for the 
royal House of Saud. If the United States took over Iraq, which ac- 
cording to many estimates has more oil than Saudi Arabia, there 
would seem to be little need to continue honoring the pact we struck 
with the Saudi royal family in the 1970s, the deal that originated 
with the Saudi Arabian Money-laundering Affair. 

The end of Saddam, like the end of Noriega in Panama, would 
change the formula. In the case of Panama, once we had reinstated 
our puppets, we controlled the Canal, regardless of the terms of the 
treaty Torrijos and Carter had negotiated. Once we controlled Iraq, 
then, could we break OPEC? Would the Saudi royal family become 
irrelevant in the arena of global oil politics? A few pundits were al- 
ready questioning why Bush attacked Iraq rather than funneling all 
of our resources into pursuing al-Qaeda in Afghanistan. Could it be 
that from the point of view of this administration — this oil family — 
establishing oil supplies, as well as a justification for construction 
contracts, was more important than fighting terrorists? 

There also was another possible outcome, however; OPEC might 
attempt to reassert itself. If the United States took control of Iraq, 



211 



the other petroleum- rich countries might have little to lose hy raising 
oil prices and /or reducing supplies. This possibility tied in with an- 
other scenario, one with implications that would likely occur to few 
people outside the world of higher international finance, yet which 
could tip the scales of the geopolitical balance and ultimately bring 
down the system the corporatocracy had worked so hard to con- 
struct. It could, in fact, turn out to be the single factor that would 
cause history's first truly global empire to self-destruct. 

In the final analysis, the global empire depends to a large extent 
on the fact that the dollar acts as the standard world currency, and 
that the United States Mint has the right to print those dollars. Thus, 
we make loans to countries like Ecuador with the full knowledge 
that they will never repay them; in fact, we do not want them to honor 
their debts, since the nonpayment is what gives us our leverage, our 
pound of flesh. Under normal conditions, we would run the risk of 
eventually decimating our own funds; after all, no creditor can af- 
ford too many defaulted loans. However, ours are not normal cir- 
cumstances. The United States prints currency that is not backed by 
gold. Indeed, it is not backed by anything other than a general 
worldwide confidence in our economy and our ability to marshal the 
forces and resources of the empire we have created to support us. 

The ability to print currency gives us immense power. It means, 
among other things, that we can continue to make loans that will 
never be repaid — and that we ourselves can accumulate huge 
debts. By the beginning of 2003, the United States' national debt ex- 
ceeded a staggering $6 trillion and was projected to reach $7 trillion 
before the end of the year — roughly $24,000 for each U.S. citizen. 
Much of this debt is owed to Asian countries, particularly to Japan 
and China, who purchase U.S. Treasury securities (essentially, IOUs) 
with funds accumulated through sales of consumer goods — including 
electronics, computers, automobiles, appliances, and clothing goods 
— to the United States and the worldwide market. 1 

As long as the world accepts the dollar as its standard currency, 
this excessive debt does not pose a serious obstacle to the corpora- 
tocracy. However, if another currency should come along to replace 
the dollar, and if some of the United States' creditors (Japan or 
China, for example) should decide to call in their debts, the situation 
would change drastically. The United States would suddenly find 
itself in a most precarious situation. 



212 Part IV: 1981-Present 



In fact, today the existence of such a currency is no longer hy- 
pothetical; the euro entered the international financial scene on 
January 1, 2002 and is growing in prestige and power with every 
passing month. The euro offers an unusual opportunity for OPEC, if 
it chooses to retaliate for the Iraq invasion, or if for any other reason 
it decides to flex its muscles against the United States. A decision hy 
OPEC to substitute the euro for the dollar as its standard currency 
would shake the empire to its very foundations. If that were to hap- 
pen, and if one or two major creditors were to demand that we repay 
our debts in euros, the impact would be enormous. 

I had these things on my mind on the morning of Good Friday, 
April 18, 2003, as I walked the short distance from my house to the 
converted garage that serves as my office, sat down at the desk, 
turned on the computer, and as usual, went to the New York Times 
Web site. The headline leaped out at me; it immediately transported 
me from my thoughts about the new realities of international fi- 
nance, the national debt, and euros back to that of my old profes- 
sion: "U.S. Gives Bechtel a Major Contract in Rebuilding Iraq." 

The article stated, "The Bush administration awarded the Bechtel 
Group of San Francisco the first major contract today in a vast re- 
construction plan for Iraq." Farther down the page, the authors in- 
formed readers that "The Iraqis will then work with the World Bank 
and the Internationa! Monetary Fund, institutions in which the 
United States enjoys wide influence, to reshape the country." 2 

Wide influence! There was an understatement. 

I linked to another Times article, "Company Has Ties in Wash- 
ington, and to Iraq." I skipped through the first several paragraphs, 
which repeated much of the information from the previous article, 
and came to: 

Bechtel has longstanding ties to the national security 
establishment... One director is George P. Shultz, who 
was secretary of state under President Ronald Reagan. 
Before joining the Reagan administration, Mr. Shultz, 
who also serves as a senior counselor to Bechtel, was 
the company's president, working alongside Caspar W. 
Weinberger, who served as an executive at the San Fran- 
cisco-based company before his appointment as defense 
secretary. This year, President Bush appointed Bechtel's 



Piercing the Veneer 213 



chief executive, Riley P. Bechtel, to serve on the Presi- 
dent's Export Council. 3 

Here in these articles was the story of modern history, the drive to 
global empire, in a nutshell. What was going on in Iraq and de- 
scribed in the morning press was the result of the work Claudine had 
trained me to do some thirty-five years before, and of the work of 
other men and women who shared a lust for self-aggrandizement 
not unlike the one I had known. It marked the current point of the 
corporatocracy's progress along the road to bringing every person in 
the world under its influence. 

These articles were about the 2003 invasion of Iraq and about the 
contracts now being signed, both to rebuild that country from the 
wreckage created by our military and to build anew in the mold of 
the modern, westernized model. Yet, without saying so, the news of 
April 18, 2003, also harked back to the early 1970s and the Saudi 
Arabian Money-laundering Affair. SAMA and the contracts flowing 
out of it had established new and irrevocable precedents that allowed 
— indeed mandated — U.S. engineering and construction companies 
and the petroleum industry to co-opt the development of a desert 
kingdom. In the same mighty blow, SAMA established new rules for 
the global management of petroleum, redefined geopolitics, and 
forged with the Saudi royal family an alliance that would ensure 
their hegemony as well as their commitment to playing by our rules. 

As I read those articles, I could not help but wonder how many 
other people knew, as I did, that Saddam would still be in charge if 
he had played the game as the Saudis had. He would have his mis- 
siles and chemical plants; we would have built them for him, and 
our people would be in charge of upgrading and servicing them. It 
would be a very sweet deal — even as Saudi Arabia had been. 

Until now, the mainstream media had been careful not to publi- 
cize this story. But today, here it was. True, it was a mere inkling; the 
articles were only the meekest ghosts of a summary, yet the story 
seemed to be emerging. Wondering if the New York Times was taking 
a maverick stance, I visited the CNN Web site and read, "Bechtel 
Wins Iraq Contract." The CNN story was very similar to the one in 
the Times, except it added, 

Several other companies have at various times been 
reported as possible competitors for the job, either as 

214 Part IV: 1981-Present 



primary bidders or as parts of teams, including the 
Kellogg Brown & Root (KBR) unit of Halliburton Co. — 
of which Vice President Dick Cheney once was CEO... 
[Already] Halliburton has won a contract, which could 
be worth $7 billion and could last up to two years, to 
make emergency repairs to Iraq's oil infrastructure. 4 

The story of the march to global empire did indeed appear to be 
leaking out. Not the details, not the fact that it was a tragic story of 
debt, deception, enslavement, exploitation, and the most blatant 
grab in history for the hearts, minds, souls, and resources of people 
around the world. Nothing in these articles hinted that the story of 
Iraq in 2003 was the continuation of a shameful story. Nor did they 
disclose that this story, as old as empire, has now taken on new and 
terrifying dimensions, both because of its magnitude during this 
time of globalization and because of the subtlety with which it is ex- 
ecuted. Despite its shortfalls, however, the story did appear to be 
leaking out, almost reluctantly. 

The idea of the reluctant story, leaking out, hit very close to home. 
It reminded me of my own personal story and of the many years I 
had postponed telling it. I had known for a very long time that I had 
a confession to make; still, I postponed making it. Thinking back, I 
see that my doubts, the whisperings of guilt, were there from the be- 
ginning. They had started in Claudine's apartment, even before I 
made the commitment to go to Indonesia on that first trip, and the} 7 
had haunted me almost incessantly all these years. 

I also knew that had the doubts, the pain, and the guilt not con- 
stantly nagged me, I would never have gotten out. Like so many others, 
I would have been stuck. I would not have stood on a beach in the 
Virgin Islands and decided to quit MAIN. Yet, I was still deferring, 
just as we as a culture continue to defer. 

These headlines seemed to hint at the alliance between big cor- 
porations, international banks, and governments, but like my MAIN 
resume, the stories barely touched the surface. It was a gloss. The 
real story had little to do with the fact that the major engineering 
and construction firms were once again receiving billions of dollars 
to develop a country in our image — among a people who in all like- 
lihood had no desire to reflect that image — or that an elite band of 

Piercing the Veneer 215 



men was repeating an age-old ritual of abusing the privileges of their 
high government positions. 

That picture is just too simple. It implies that all we need to do, 
if we decide to right the wrongs of the system, is to throw these men 
out. It feeds into the conspiracy theories and thereby provides a 
convenient excuse to turn on the TV and forget about it all, comfortable 
in our third-grade view of history, which runs: "They" will take care of 
it; the ship of state is seaworthy and will get nudged back on course. We 
may have to wait for the next election, but all will turn out for the best. 

The real story of modern empire — of the corporatocracy that ex- 
ploits desperate people and is executing history's most brutal, selfish, 
and ultimately self-destructive resource-grab — has little to do with 
what was exposed in the newspapers that morning and has every- 
thing to do with us. And that, of course, explains why we have such 
difficulty listening to the real story. We prefer to believe the myth 
that thousands of years of human social evolution has finally per- 
fected the ideal economic system, rather than to face the fact we have 
merely bought into a false concept and accepted it as gospel. We have 
convinced ourselves that all economic growth benefits humankind, 
and that the greater the growth, the more widespread the benefits. 
Finally, we have persuaded one another that the corollary to this 
concept is valid and morally just: that people who excel at stoking 
the fires of economic growth should be exalted and rewarded, while 
those born at the fringes are available for exploitation. 

This concept and its corollary are used to justify all manner of 
piracy — licenses are granted to rape and pillage and murder inno- 
cent people in Iran, Panama, Colombia, Iraq, and elsewhere. EHMs, 
jackals, and armies flourish for as long as their activities can be 
shown to generate economic growth — and they almost always 
demonstrate such growth. Thanks to the biased "sciences" of fore- 
casting, econometrics, and statistics, if you bomb a city and then re- 
build it, the data shows a huge spike in economic growth. 

The real story is that we are living a lie. Like my MAIN resume, 
we have created a veneer that hides the fatal cancers beneath the 
surface. Those cancers are exposed by the X-rays of our statistics, 
which disclose the terrifying fact that history's most powerful and 
wealthiest empire has outrageously high rates of suicide, drug abuse, 
divorce, child molestation, rape, and murder, and that like a malignant 



216 Part IV: 1981-Present 



cancer, these afflictions spread their tentacles in an ever-widening 
radius every year. In our hearts, each of us feels the pain. We cry out 
for change. Yet, we slam our fists to our mouths, stifling those cries, 
and so we go unheard. 

It would he great if we could just blame it all on a conspiracy, but we 
cannot. The empire depends on the efficacy of big banks, corporations, 
and governments— the corporatocracy— but it is not a conspiracy. 
This corporatocracy is ourselves — we make it happen— which, of 
course, is why most of us find it difficult to stand up and oppose it. 
We would rather glimpse conspirators lurking in the shadows, be- 
cause most of us work for one of those banks, corporations, or gov- 
ernments, or in some way are dependent on them for the goods and 
services they produce and market. We cannot bring ourselves to bite 
the hand of the master who feeds us. 

That is the situation I was pondering as I sat staring at the head- 
lines on the screen of my computer. And it raised a number of ques- 
tions. How do you rise up against a system that appears to provide 
you with your home and car, food and clothes, electricity and health 
care — even when you know that the system also creates a world 
where twenty-four thousand people starve to death each day and 
millions more hate you, or at least hate the policies made by repre- 
sentatives you elected? How do you muster the courage to step out 
of line and challenge concepts you and your neighbors have always 
accepted as gospel, even when you suspect that the system is ready 
to self-destruct? Slowly, I stood up and headed back to the house to 
pour myself another cup of coffee. 

I took a short detour and picked up my copy of the Palm Beach 
Post, lying near the mailbox beside our driveway. It had the same 
Bechtel-Iraq article, copyrighted by the New York Times. But now I 
noticed the date on the masthead: April 18. It is a famous date, at 
least in New England, instilled in me by my Revolutionary War- 
minded parents and by Longfellow's poem: 

Listen, my children, and you shall hear 

Of the midnight ride of Paul Revere, 

On the eighteenth of April, in Seventy-five; 

Hardly a man is now alive 

Who remembers that famous day and year. 



Piercing the Veneer 217 



This year, Good Friday happened to fall on the anniversary- of 
Paul Revere's ride. Seeing that date on the front page of the Post 
made me think of the colonial silversmith racing his horse through 
the dark streets of New England towns, waving his hat and shouting, 
"The British are coming!" Revere had risked his life to spread the 
word, and loyal Americans responded. They stopped the empire, 
back then. 

I wondered what had motivated them, why those colonial Amer- 
icans were willing to step out of line. Many of the ringleaders had 
been prosperous. What had inspired them to risk their businesses, to 
bite the hand that fed them, to risk their lives? Each of them un- 
doubtedly had personal reasons, and yet there must have been some 
unifying force, some energy or catalyst, a spark that ignited all those 
individual fires at that single moment in history. 

And then it came to me: words. 

The telling of the real story about the British Empire and its selfish 
and ultimately self-destructive mercantile system had provided that 
spark. The exposure of the underlying meaning, through the words 
of men like Tom Paine and Thomas Jefferson, fired the imaginations 
of their countrymen, opened hearts and minds. The colonists began 
to question, and when they did, they discovered a new reality that 
cut away at the deceits. They discerned the truth behind the patina, 
understood the way the British Empire had manipulated, deceived, 
and enslaved them. 

They saw that their English masters had formulated a system and 
then had managed to convince most people of a lie —that it was the 
best system mankind could offer, that the prospects for a better 
world depended on channeling resources through the King of Eng- 
land, that an imperial approach to commerce and politics was the 
most efficient and humane means of helping the majority of the peo- 
ple—when in fact the truth was that the system enriched only a very 
few at the expense of the many. This lie, and the resulting exploita- 
tion, endured and expanded for decades, until a handful of philoso- 
phers, businessmen, farmers, fishermen, frontiersmen, writers, and 
orators began to speak the truth. 

Words. I thought about their power as I refilled my coffee cup, 
walked back to my office, and returned to the computer. 



218 Part IV: 1981-Present 



I logged oft' the CNN Web site and brought up the file I had been 
working on the night before. I read the last paragraph I had written: 

This story must be told. We live in a time of terrible crisis 
— and tremendous opportunity. The story of this particular 
economic hit man is the story of how we got to where we 
are and why we currently face crises that seem insur- 
mountable. This story must be told because only by 
understanding our past mistakes will we be able to take 
advantage of future opportunities.... Most importantly, 
this story must be told because today, for the first time in 
history, one nation has the ability, the money, and the 
power to change all this. It is the nation where I was born 
and the one I served as an EHM: the United States of 
America. 

This time I would not stop. The coincidences of my life and the 
choices I had made around them had brought me to this point. I 
would move forward. 

I thought again of that other man, that lone rider galloping 
through the dark New England countryside, shouting out his warn- 
ing. The silversmith knew that the words of Paine had preceded him, 
that people had read those words in their homes and discussed them 
in the taverns. Paine had pointed out the truth about the tyranny of 
the British Empire. Jefferson would proclaim that our nation was 
dedicated to the principles of life, liberty, and the pursuit of happi- 
ness. And Revere, riding through the night, understood that men 
and women throughout the colonies would be empowered by those 
words; they would rise up and fight for a better world. 

Words... 

I made my decision to stop procrastinating, to finish finally what 
I had started so many times over all those years, to come clean, to 
confess — to write the words in this book. 



Piercing the Veneer 219 



EPILOGUE 



We have arrived at the end of this book, and also at a beginning. You 
are probably wondering where to go next, what you can do to stop 
the corporatocracy and to end this insane and self-destructive march 
to global empire. You are ready to leave the book behind and pounce 
on the world. 

You want ideas, and I could offer you some. 

I could point out that the chapter you just read, about Bechtel 
and Halliburton in Iraq, is old news. By the time you read it, it may 
seem redundant. However, the significance of those newspaper ar- 
ticles goes far beyond the timeliness of their content. That chapter, 
I hope, will change the way you view the news, help you to read 
between the lines of every newspaper article that comes before you 
and to question the deeper implications of every radio and television 
report you tune in to. 

Things are not as they appear. NBC is owned by General Electric, 
ABC by Disney, CBS by Viacom, and CNN is part of the huge AOL 
Time Warner conglomerate. Most of our newspapers, magazines, 
and publishing houses are owned — and manipulated —by gigantic 
international corporations. Our media is part of the corporatocracy. 
The officers and directors who control nearly all our communica- 
tions outlets know their places; they are taught throughout life that 
one of their most important jobs is to perpetuate, strengthen, and 
expand the system they have inherited. They are very efficient at do- 
ing so, and when opposed, they can be ruthless. So the burden falls 
on you to see the truth beneath the veneer and to expose it. Speak it 
to your family and friends; spread the word. 

I could give you a list of practical things to do. For instance, cut 
back on your oil consumption. In 1990, before we first invaded Iraq, 
we imported 8 million barrels of oil; by 2003 and the second inva- 
sion, this had increased more than 50 percent, to over 12 million 
barrels. 1 The next time you are tempted to go shopping, read a book 
instead, exercise, or meditate. Downsize your home, wardrobe, car, 
office, and most everything else in your life. Protest against "free" 



221 



trade agreements and against companies that exploit desperate 
people in sweatshops or that pillage the environment. 

I could tell you that there is great hope within the current system, 
that there is nothing inherently wrong with banks, corporations, and 
governments — or with the people who manage them — and that 
they certainly do not have to compose a corporatocracy. I could go 
into detail about how the problems confronting us today are not the 
result of malicious institutions; rather, they stem from fallacious 
concepts about economic development. The fault lies not in the insti- 
tutions themselves, but in our perceptions of the manner in which 
they function and interact with one another, and of the role their 
managers play in that process. 

In fact, those highly effective worldwide communications and 
distribution networks could be used to bring about positive and 
compassionate changes. Imagine if the Nike swoosh, MacDonald's 
arches, and Coca-Cola logo became symbols of companies whose 
primary goals were to clothe and feed the world's poor in environ- 
mentally beneficial ways. This is no more unrealistic than putting a 
man on the moon, breaking up the Soviet Union, or creating the in- 
frastructure that allows those companies to reach every corner of the 
planet. We need a revolution in our approach to education, to em- 
power ourselves and our children to think, to question, and to dare 
to act. You can set an example. Be a teacher and a student; inspire 
everyone around you through your example. 

I could encourage you to take specific actions that will impact the 
institutions in your life. Speak out whenever any forum presents itself, 
write letters and e-mails, phone in questions and concerns, vote 
for enlightened school boards, county commissions, and local ordi- 
nances. When you must shop, do it consciously; get personally involved. 

I could remind you of what the Shuars told me in 1990, that the 
world is as you dream it, and that we can trade in that old nightmare 
of polluting industries, clogged highways, and overcrowded cities for 
a new dream based on Earth-honoring and socially responsible prin- 
ciples of sustainability and equality. It is within our power to trans- 
form ourselves, to change the paradigm. 

I could enumerate the amazing opportunities we have available 
to us for creating a better world, right now: enough food and water for 
everyone; medicines to cure diseases and to prevent epidemics that 
needlessly plague millions of people today; transportation systems 



222 Confessions of an Economic Hit Man 



that can deliver life's essentials to even the most remote corners of 
the planet; the ability to raise literacy levels and to provide Internet 
services that could make it possible for every person on the planet to 
communicate with every other person; tools for conflict resolution 
that could render wars obsolete; technologies that explore both the 
vastness of space and the most minute, subatomic energy, which 
could then be applied to developing more ecologic and efficient 
homes for everyone; sufficient resources to accomplish all of the 
above; and much more. 

I could suggest steps for you to take immediately, to help others 
understand the crises and the opportunities. 

• Offer study groups about Confessions of an Economic Hit Man 
at your local bookstore or library, or both (a guideline for doing 
this is available at www.JohnPerkins.org). 

• Develop a presentation for a nearby elementary school on your 
favorite subject (sports, cooking, ants — almost anything), and 
use it to help students wake up to the true nature of the society 
they are inheriting. 

• Send e-mails to all the addresses in your file, expressing feelings 
triggered by this and other books you read. 

But I suspect you have already thought of most of these things. 
You just need to pick a couple that most appeal to you and do them, 
and to realize that all of these are part of a much greater commitment 
that you and I must make. We must commit ourselves absolutely 
and unequivocally to shaking ourselves and everyone around us 
awake. We must hear the wisdom of the prophecies, open our hearts 
and minds to the possibilities, become conscious, and then take action. 

However, this book is not a prescription; it is a confession, pure 
and simple. It is the confession of a man who allowed himself to be- 
come a pawn, an economic hit man; a man who bought into a cor- 
rupt system because it offered so many perks, and because buying in 
was easy to justify; a man who knew better but who could always 
find excuses for his own greed, for exploiting desperate people and 
pillaging the planet; a man who took full advantage of the fact that 
he was born into one of the wealthiest societies history has ever 
known, and who also could pity himself because his parents were 
not at the top of the pyramid; a man who listened to his teachers, 

Epilogue 223 



read the textbooks on economic development, and then followed the 
example of other men and women who legitimatize every action that 
promotes global empire, even if that action results in murder, geno- 
cide, and environmental destruction; a man who trained others to 
follow in his footsteps. It is my confession. 

The fact that you have read this far indicates that you can relate 
on some personal level to my confession, that you and I share a lot in 
common. We may have traveled different roads, but we have driven 
similar vehicles, used the same fuels, and stopped to eat at restau- 
rants owned by the same corporations. 

For me, confessing was an essential part of my personal wake-up 
call. Like all confessions, it is the first step toward redemption. 

Now it is your turn. You need to make your own confession. 
When you come clean on who you are, why you are here during this 
time in history, why you have done the things you have — the ones 
you are proud of, and those others — and where you intend to go 
next, you will experience an immediate sense of relief. It may be 
nothing less than euphoric. 

Believe me when I say that writing this book has been deeply 
emotional, and often a painful and humiliating experience. It has 
been frightening in a way nothing I ever faced before has been 
frightening. But it has opened me to a sense of relief I have never 
known until now, a feeling I can only describe as ecstatic. 

Ask yourself these questions. What do I need to confess? How 
have I deceived myself and others? Where have I deferred? Why 
have I allowed myself to be sucked into a system that I know is un- 
balanced? What will I do to make sure our children, and all children 
everywhere, are able to fulfill the dream of our Founding Fathers, the 
dream of life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness? What course will 
I take to end the needless starvation, and make sure there is never 
again a day like September 11? How can I help our children under- 
stand that people who live gluttonous, unbalanced lives should be 
pitied but never, ever emulated, even if those people present them- 
selves, through the media they control, as cultural icons and try to 
convince us that penthouses and yachts bring happiness? What 
changes will I commit to making in my attitudes and perceptions? 
What forums will I use to teach others and to learn more on my own? 

These are the essential questions of our time. Each of us needs 
to answer them in our own way and to express our answers clearly, 

224 Confessions of an Economic Hit Man 



unequivocally. Paine and Jefferson and all the other patriots are 
watching over our shoulders. Their words continue to inspire us to- 
day. The spirits of those men and women who left their farms and 
fishing boats and headed out to confront the might}' British Empire, 
and of those who fought to emancipate the slaves during the Civil 
War, and of those who sacrificed their lives to protect the world from 
fascism, speak to us. As do the spirits of the ones who stayed at home 
and produced the food and clothes and gave their moral support, 
and of all the men and women who have defended what was won on 
those battlefields: the teachers, poets, artists, entrepreneurs, health 
workers, the manual laborers... you and me. 

The hour is ours. It is now time for each and every one of us to 
step up to the battle line, to ask the important questions, to search 
our souls for our own answers, and to take action. 

The coincidences of your life, and the choices you have made in 
response to them, have brought you to this point... 



Epilogue 225 



JOHN PERKINS PERSONAL HISTORY 



1963 Graduates prep school, enters Middlebury College. 

1964 Befriends Farhad, son of an Iranian general. Drops 
out of Middlebury. 

1965 Works for Hearst newspapers in Boston. 

1966 Enters Boston University College of Business 
Administration. 

1967 Marries former Middlebury classmate, whose "Uncle 
Frank" is a top-echelon executive at the National 
Security Agency (NSA). 

1968 Profiled by the NSA as an ideal economic hit man. 
With Uncle Frank's blessing, joins the Peace Corps 
and is assigned to the Ecuadorian Amazon, where 
ancient indigenous tribes battle U.S. oil companies. 

1969 Lives in the rain forest and the Andes. Experiences 
firsthand the deceitful and destructive practices em- 
ployed by oil companies and government agencies, 
and their negative impacts on local cultures and 
environments. 

1970 In Ecuador, meets vice president of international con- 
sulting firm MAIN, who is also an NSA liaison officer. 

1971 Joins MAIN, undergoes clandestine training in 
Boston as an economic hit man (EHM), and is sent 
as part of an eleven-man team to Java, Indonesia. 
Struggles with conscience over pressure to falsify 
economic studies. 

1972 Due to willingness to "cooperate," is promoted to chief 
economist and is viewed as a "whiz kid." Meets im- 
portant leaders, including World Bank president 
Robert McNamara. Sent on special assignment to 
Panama. Befriended by Panamanian president and 
charismatic leader, Omar Torrijos; learns about his- 
tory of U.S. imperialism and Torrijos's determination 



226 



to transfer Canal ownership from the United States 
to Panama. 

1973 Career skyrockets. Builds empire within MAIN; 
continues work in Panama; travels extensively and 
conducts studies in Asia, Latin America, and the 
Middle East. 

1974 Instrumental in initiating a huge EHM success in 
Saudi Arabia. Royal family agrees to invest billions 
of dollars of oil income in U.S. securities and to allow 
the U.S. Department of the Treasury to use the inter- 
est from those investments to hire U.S. firms to build 
power and water systems, highways, ports, and cities 
in the kingdom. In exchange, the United States guar- 
antees that the royal family will continue to rule. 
This will serve as a model for future EHM deals, in- 
cluding one that ultimately fails in Iraq. 

1975 Promoted again — to youngest partner in MAIN's 
one hundred-year history — and named manager of 
Economics and Regional Planning. Publishes series 
of influential papers; lectures at Harvard and other 
institutions. 

1976 Heads major projects around the world, in Africa, 
Asia, Latin America, North America, and the Middle 
East. Learns from the shah of Iran a revolutionary 
approach to EHM empire building. 

1977 Due to personal relationships in Colombia, becomes 
exposed to the plight of farmers who are branded as 
communist terrorists and drug traffickers, but are in 
fact peasants trying to protect their families and homes. 

1978 Rushed out of Iran by Farhad. Together, they fly to 
the Rome home of Farhad's father, an Iranian gen- 
eral, who predicts the shah's imminent ouster and 
blames U.S. policy, corrupt leaders, and despotic gov- 
ernments for the hatred sweeping the Middle East. 
He warns that if the United States does not become 
more compassionate, the situation will deteriorate. 

1979 Struggles with conscience as the shah flees his country 
and Iranians storm the U.S. Embassy, taking fifty-two 

John Perkins Personal History 227 



hostages. Realizes that the United States is a nation 
laboring to deny the truth about its imperialist role 
in the world. After years of tension and frequent sep- 
arations, divorces first wife. 

1980 Suffers from deep depression, guilt, and the realiza- 
tion that money and power have trapped him at 
MAIN. Quits. 

1981 Is deeply disturbed when Ecuador's president Jaime 
Roldos (who has campaigned on an anti-oil platform) 
and Panama's Omar Torrijos (who has incurred the 
wrath of powerful Washington interests, due to his 
positions on the Panama Canal and U.S. military 
bases) die in fiery airplane crashes that have all the 
markings of CIA assassinations. Marries for the sec- 
ond time, to a woman whose father is chief architect 
at Bechtel Corporation and is in charge of designing 
and building cities in Saudi Arabia —work financed 
through the 1974 EHM deal. 

1982 Creates Independent Power Systems Inc. (IPS), a 
company committed to producing environmentally 
friendly electricity. Fathers Jessica. 

1983-1989 Succeeds spectacularly as IPS CEO, with much help 
from "coincidences" — people in high places, tax 
breaks, etc. As a father, frets over world crises and 
former EHM role. Begins writing a tell-all book, but 
is offered a lucrative consultants' retainer on the con- 
dition that he not write the book. 

1990-1991 Following the U.S. invasion of Panama and impris- 
onment of Noriega, sells IPS and retires at forty-five. 
Contemplates book about life as an EHM, but in- 
stead is persuaded to direct energies toward creating 
a nonprofit organization, an effort which, he is told, 
would be negatively impacted by such a book. 

1992-2000 Watches the EHM failures in Iraq that result in the 
first Gulf War. Three times starts to write the EHM 
book, but instead gives in to threats and bribes. Tries 
to assuage conscience by writing books about indige- 
nous peoples, supporting nonprofit organizations, 

228 Confessions of an Economic Hit Man 



teaching at New Age forums, traveling to the Amazon 
and the Himalayas, meeting with the Dalai Lama, etc. 

2001-2002 Leads a group of North Americans deep into the 
Amazon, and is there with an indigenous tribe on 
September 11, 2001. Spends a day at Ground Zero 
and commits to writing the book that can heal his 
pain and expose the truth behind EHMs. 

2003-2004 Returns to the Ecuadorian Amazon to meet with 
the indigenous tribes who have threatened war 
against the oil companies; writes Confessions of an 
Economic Hit Man. 



John Perkins Personal History 229 



NOTES 



Preface 

1. The United Nations World Food Programme, http://www.wfp.org/ 

index.asp?section=l (accessed December 27, 2003). In addition, the 
National Association for the Prevention of Starvation estimates that "Every 
day 34,000 children under five die of hunger or preventable diseases 
resulting from hunger" (http://www.napsoc.org, accessed December 27, 
2003). Starvation.net estimates that "if we were to add the next two lead- 
ing ways (after starvation) the poorest of the poor die, waterborne diseases 
and AIDS, we would be approaching a daily body count of 50,000 deaths" 
(http://www.starvation.net, accessed December 27, 2003). 

2. U.S. Department of Agriculture findings, reported by the Food Research 
and Action Center (FRAC), http://www.frac.org (accessed December 27, 
2003). 

3. United Nations. Human Development Report. (New York: United Nations, 
1999). 

4. "In 1998, the United Nations Development Program estimated that it would 
cost an additional $9 billion (above current expenditures) to provide clean 
water and sanitation for everyone on earth. It would cost an additional $12 
billion, they said, to cover reproductive health services for all women world- 
wide. Another $13 billion would be enough not only to give ever)' person on 
earth enough food to eat but also basic health care. An additional $6 bil- 
lion could provide basic education for all... Combined they add up to S40 
billion." — John Robbins, author of Diet for a New America and The Food 
Revolution, http://www.foodrevolution.org (accessed December 27, 2003). 

Prologue 

1. Gina Chavez et ah, Tarimiat — Firmes enNuestro Territorio: FIFSE vs. 
ARCO, eds. Mario Melo and Juana Sotomayor (Quito, Ecuador: CDES and 
CONAIE, 2002), 

2. Sandy Tolan, "Ecuador: Lost Promises," National Public Radio, Morning 
Edition, July 9, 2003, http://www.npr.org/programs/morning/features/ 
2003/jul/latinoil (accessed July 9, 2003). 

3. Juan Forero, "Seeking Balance: Growth vs. Culture in the Amazon," New 
York Times, December 10, 2003. 

4. Abby Ellin, "Suit Says ChevronTexaco Dumped Poisons in Ecuador," New 

York Times, May 8, 2003. 



230 



5. Chris Jochnick, "Perilous Prosperity," New Internationalist, June 2O01, 
http://wvvw.newint.org/issue335/perilouK.htm. For more extensive infor- 
mation, see also Pamela Martin, The Globalization of Contentions Politics: 
The Amazonian Indigenous Rights Movement (New York: Rutiedge, 
2002); Kimerling, Amazon Crude (New York: Natural Resource Defense 
Council, 1991); Leslie Wirpsa, trans., Upheaval in the Back Yard: Illegiti- 
mate Debts and Human Rights — The Case of Ecuador-Norway (Quito, 
Ecuador: Centre de Derechos Economicos y Sociales, 2002); and Gregory 
Palast, "Inside Corporate America," Guardian, October 8, 2000. 

6. For information about the impact of oil on national and global economies, 
see Michael T. Klare, Resource Wars: The New Landscape of Global Conflict 
(New York: Henry Holt and Company, 2001); Daniel Yergin, The Prize: The 
Epic Quest for Oil, Money £5? Power (New York: Free Press, 1993); and 
Daniel Yergin and Joseph Stanislaw, The Commanding Heights: The Battle 

for the World Economy (New York: Simon & Schuster, 2001). 

7. James S. Henry, "Where the Money Went," Across the Board, March/April 

2004, pp 42-45. For more information, see Henry's book The Blood 
Bankers: Tales from the Global Underground Economy (New York: Four 
Walls Eight Windows, 2003). 

8. Gina Chavez et al., Tarimiat — Firmes en Nuestro Territorio: FIPSEvs. 
ARCO, eds. Mario Melo and Juana Sotomayor (Quito, Ecuador: CDES and 
CONAIE, 2002); Petroleo, Ambiente y Derechos en la Amazonia Centra 
Sur, Edition Victor Lopez A, Centro de Derechos Economicos y Sociales, 
OPIP, IACYT-A (under the auspices of Oxfam America) (Quito, Ecuador: 
Sergrafic, 2002). 

9. Sandy Tolan, "Ecuador: Lost Promises." National Public Radio, Morning 
Edition, July 9, 2003, http://www.npr.org/programs/morning/features/ 
2003/jul/latinoil (accessed July 9. 2003). 

10. For more on the jackals and other types of hit men, see P. W. Singer, Cor- 
porate Warriors: The Rise of the Privatized Military Industry (Ithaca, NY 
and London: Cornell University Press, 2003); James R. Davis, Fortune's 
Warriors: Private Armies and the New World Order (Vancouver and 
Toronto: Douglas & Mclntyre, 2000); Felix I. Rodriguez and John Weis- 
man, Shadow Warrior: The CIA Hero of 100 Unknown Battles (New York: 
Simon and Schuster, 1989). 

Chapter 2. "In for Life" 

1. For a detailed account of this fateful operation, see Stephen Kinzer, All the 
Shah's Men: An American Coup and the Roots of Middle East Terror 
(Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2003). 

2. Jane Mayer, "Contract Sport: What Did the Vice-President Do for Hallibur- 
ton?", New Yorker, February 16 & 23, 2004, p 83. 

Chapter 3. Indonesia: Lessons for an EHM 

1. For more on Indonesia and its history, see Jean Gelman Taylor, Indonesia: 



Notes 231 



Peoples and Histories (New Haven and London: Yale University Press, 
2003); and Theodore Friend, Indonesian Destinies- (Cambridge MA and 
London: The Belknap Press of Harvard University, 2003). 

Chapter 6. My Role as Inquisitor 

1. Theodore Friend, Indonesian Destinies (Cambridge MA and London: The 
Belknap Press ofHarvard University, 2003), p 5. 

Chapter 10. Panama's President and Hero 

1. See David McCullough, The Path Between the Seas: The Creation of the 

Panama Canal 1870-1914 (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1999); William 
Friar, Portrait of the Panama Canal: From Construction to the Twenty-First 
Century (New York: Graphic Arts Publishing Company, 1999); Graham 
Greene, Conversations with the General (New York: Pocket Books, 19840. 

2. See ''Zapata Petroleum Corp.", Fortune, April 1.958, p 248; Darwin Payne, 
Initiative in Energy: Dresser Industries, Inc. 1880-1978 (New York: Simon 
and Schuster, 1979); Steve Pizzo et al., Inside Job: The Looting of America's 
Savings and Loans (New York: McGraw Hill, 1989); Gary Wehb, Dark Al- 
liance: The CIA, The. Contras, and the Crack Cocaine Explosion (New York: 
Seven Stories Press, 1999); Gerard Colby and Charlotte Dennet, Thy Will 
Be Done, The Conquest of the Amazon: Nelson Rockefeller and Evangelism 
in the Age of Oil (New York: HarperCollins, 1995). 

3. Manuel Noriega with Peter Eisner, TheMemoirs of 'Manuel Noriega, Amer- 
ica's Prisoner (New York: Random House, 1997); OmarTorrijos Herrera, 
Ideario (Editorial Universitaria Centroamericano, 1983); Graham Greene, 
Conversations with the General (New York: Pocket Books, 1984). 

4. Graham Greene, Conversations with the General (New York: Pocket Books, 
1984); Manuel Noriega with Peter Eisner, The Memoirs of Manuel Noriega, 
America's Prisoner (New York: Random House, 1997). 

5. Derrick Jensen, A Language Older than Words (New York: Context Books, 
2000), pp 86-88. 

6. Graham Greene, Conversations with the General (New York: Pocket Books, 
1984); Manuel Noriega with Peter Eisner, The Memoirs of Manuel Noriega. 
America's Prisoner (New York: Random House, 1997)- 

Chapter 13. Conversations with the General 

1. William Shawcross: The Shah's Last Ride: The Fate of an Ally (New York: 

Simon and Schuster, 1988); Stephen Kinzer, ^4?? the Shah's Men: An Ameri- 
can Coup and the Roots of Middle East Terror (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & 
Sons, Inc., 2003), p 45. 

2. A great deal has been written about Arbenz, United Fruit, and the violent 
history of Guatemala; see for example (my Boston University political sci- 
ence professor) Howard Zinn,^4 People's History of the United States (New 
York: Harper & Row, 1980); Diane K. Stanley, For the Record: The United 



232 Confessions of an Economic Hit Man 



Fruit Company's Sixty-Six Years in Guatemala (Guatemala City: Centro 
Impresor Piedra Santa, 1994), For quick references: "The Banana Republic: 
The United Fruit Company," http://www.mayaparadise.com/ufcle.html; 
"CIA Involved in Guatemala Coup, 1954," http://www.english. upenn.edu/ 
~afilreis/50s/guatemala.htmL For more on the Bush family's involvement: 
"Zapata Petroleum Corp.," Fortune, April 1958, p 248. 

Chapter 14. Entering a New and Sinister Period in Economic History 

1. "Robert S. McNamara: 8th Secretary of Defense," 

http://www.defenselink.mil (accessed December 23, 2003). 

Chapter 15. The Saudi Arabian Money-laundering Affair 

1. For more on the events leading up to the 1973 oil embargo and the impact 

of the embargo, see: Thomas W. Lippman, Inside the Mirage: Americas 
Fragile Partnership with Saudi Arabia (Boulder CO: Westview Press, 
2004), pp 155-159; Daniel Yergin, The Prize: The Epic Quest for Oil, Money 
U Power (New York: Free Press, 1993); Stephen Schneider, The Oil Price 
Revolution (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1983); Ian Sey- 
mour, OPEC: Instrument of Change (London: McMillan, 1980). 

2. Thomas W. Lippman, Inside the Mirage: America's Fragile Partnership 
-with Saudi Arabia (Boulder CO: Westview Press, 2004), p 160. 

3. David Holden and Richard Johns, The House ofSaud: The Rise and Rule of 
the Most Powerful Dynasty in the Arab World (New York: Holt Rinehart 
and Winston, 1981), p 359. 

4. Thomas W. Lippman, Inside the Mirage: America's Fragile Partnership 
with Saudi Arabia (Boulder CO: Westview Press, 2004), p 167. 

Chapter 16. Pimping, and Financing Osama bin Laden 

1. Robert Baer, Sleeping with the Devil: Hozo Washington Sold Our Soul for 
Saudi Oil (New York: Crown Publishers, 2003), p 26. 

2. Thomas W. Lippman, Inside the Mirage: America's Fragile Partnership 
with Saudi Arabia (Boulder CO: Westview Press, 2004), p 162. 

3. Thomas W. Lippman, Inside the Mirage: America's Fragile Partnership 
with Saudi Arabia. (Boulder CO: Westview Press, 2004), p 2. 

4. Henry Wasswa, "Idi Amin, Murderous Ugandan Dictator, Dies," Associated 
Press, August 17, 2003. 

5. "The Saudi Connection," U.S. News & World Report, December 15, 2003, p 21. 

6. "The Saudi Connection," U.S. News & World Report, December 15, 2003, 
pp 19, 20, 26. 

7- Craig Unger, "Saving the Saudis," Vanity Fair, October 2003. For more on 
the Bush family's involvement, Bechtel, etc., see: "Zapata Petroleum Corp.," 
Fortune, April 1958, p 248; Darwin Payne, Initiative in Energy: Dresser 
Industries, Inc. 1880-1978 (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1979); Nathan 



Notes 233 



Vardi, "Desert Storm: Bechtel Group Is Leading the Charge," and "Contacts 
for Contracts," both in Forbes, June 23, 2003, pp 63-66; Graydon Carter, 
"Editor's Letter: Fly the Friendly Skies..." Vanity Fair, October 2003: 
Richard A. Oppel with Diana B. Henriques, "A Nation at War: The Con- 
tractor. Company has ties in Washington, and to Iraq," New York Times, 
April 18, 2003. 

Chapter 17. Panama Canal Negotiations and Graham Greene 

1. See for example: John M. Perkins, "Colonialism in Panama Has No Place in 

1975," Boston Evening Globe, Op-Ed page, September 19, 1975; John M. 
Perkins, "U.S.-Brazil Pact Upsets Ecuador," The Boston Globe, Op-Ed page, 
May 10, 1976. 

2. For examples of papers by John Perkins published in technical journals, 
see: John M. Perkins et al., '"A Markov Process Applied to Forecasting, Part 
I — - Economic Development" and "A Markov Process Applied to Forecast- 
ing, Part II — The Demand for Electricity," The Institute of Electrical and 
Electronics Engineers, Conference Papers C 73 475-1 (July 1973) and C 74 
146-7 (January 1974), respectively; John M. Perkins and Nadipuram R. 
Prasad, 'A Model for Describing Direct and Indirect Interrelationships 
Between the Economy and the Environment," Consulting Engineer, April 
1973; Edwin Vennard, John M. Perkins, and Robert C. Ender, "Electric 
Demand from Interconnected Systems," TAPPIJournal (Technical Associ- 
ation of the Pulp and Paper Industry), 28th Conference Edition, 1974: 
John M. Perkins et al., "Iranian Steel: Implications for the Economy and 
the Demand for Electricity" and "Markov Method Applied to Planning," 
presented at the Fourth Iranian Conference on Engineering, Pahlavi Uni- 
versity, Shiraz, Iran, May 12-16, 1974; and Economic Theories and Applica- 
tions: A Collection of Technical Papers with a Foreward by John M. Perkins 
(Boston: Chas. T. Main, Inc., 1975). 

3. John M. Perkins, "Colonialism in Panama Has No Place in 1975," Boston 
Evening Globe, Op-Ed page, September 19, 1975. 

4. Graham Greene, Getting to Know the General (New York: Pocket Books, 
1984), pp 89-90. 

5. Graham Greene, Getting to Know the General (New York: Pocket Books, 
1984). 

Chapter 18. Iran's King of Kings 

1. William Shawcross, The Shah's Last Ride: The Fate of an Ally (New York: 

Simon and Schuster, 1988). For more about the Shah's rise to power, see 
H. D. S. Greenway, "The Iran Conspiracy," New York Review of Books, 
September 23, 2003; Stephen Kinzer,vl// the Shah's Men: An American 
Coup and the Roots of Middle East Terror (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & 
Sons, Inc., 2003). 

2. For more about Yamin, the Flowering Desert project, and Iran, see John 
Perkins, Shapeshifting (Rochester, VT: Destiny Books, 1997). 



234 Confessions of an Economic Hit Man 



Chapter 20. The Fall of a King 

1. For more about the Shah's rise to power, see H.D.S. Greenway, "The Iran 

Conspiracy" New York Review of Books, September 23, 2003; Stephen 
Kinzer, All the Shah's Men: An American Coup and the Roots of Middle 
East Terror (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 200,3). 

2. See TIME magazine cover articles on the Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, 
February- 12, 1979, January 7, 1980, and August 17, 1987- 

Chapter 21. Colombia: Keystone of Latin America 

1. Gerard Colby and Charlotte Dennet, Thy Will Be Done, The Conquest of the 
Amazon: Nelson Rockefeller and Evangelism in the Age of Oil (New York: 
HarperCollins, 1995), p 381. 

Chapter 24. Ecuador's President Battles Big Oil 

1. For extensive details on SIL, its history, activities, and association with the 

oil companies and the Rockefellers, see Gerard Colby and Charlotte Dennet, 
Thy Will Be Done, The Conquest of the Amazon: Nehon Rockefeller and 
Evangelism in the Age of Oil (New York: HarperCollins, 1995); Joe Kane, 
Savages (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1995) (for information on Rachel 
Saint, pp 85, 156, 227). 

2. John D. Martz, Politics and Petroleum in Ecuador (New Brunswick and 
Oxford: Transaction Books, 1987), p 272. 

3. Jose Carvajal Candall, "Objetivos y Politicas de CEPE" (Quito, Ecuador: 
Primer Seminario, 1979), p 88. 

Chapter 26. Ecuador's Presidential Death 

1. John D. Martz. Politics and Petroleum in Ecuador (New Brunswick and Ox- 

ford: Transaction Books, 1987), p 272. 

2. Gerard Colby and Charlotte Dennet: Thy Will Be Done, The Conquest of the 
Amazon: Nelson Rockefeller and Evangelism in the Age of Oil (New York, 
HarperCollins, 1995), p 813. 

3. John D. Martz, Politics and Petroleum in Ecuador (New Brunswick and Ox- 
ford: Transaction Books, 1987), p 303. 

4. John D. Martz, Politics and Petroleum in Ecuador (New Brunswick and Ox- 
ford: Transaction Books, 1987), pp 381, 400. 

Chapter 27. Panama: Another Presidential Death 

1. Graham Greene, Getting to Kncne the General (New York: Pocket Books. 

1984), p 11. 

2. George Shultz was secretary of the Treasury and chairman of the Council 
on Economic Policy under Nixon-Ford, 1972-1974, executive president or 
president of Bechtel , 1974-1982, secretary of state under Reagan-Bush, 
1982-1989; Caspar Weinberger was director of the Office of Management 
and Budget and secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare under Nixon- 



Notes 235 



Ford, 1973-7-5, vice president and genera] counsel of Bechtel Group, 
1975-80, secretary of defense under Reagan-Bush, 1980-87. 

3. During the 1973 Watergate hearings, in his testimony before the U.S. Sen- 
ate, John Dean was the first to disclose U.S. plots to assassinate Torrijos; in 
1975, at Senate inquiries into the CIA, chaired by Senator Frank Church, 
additional testimony and documentation of plans to kill both Torrijos and 
Noriega were presented. See, for example, Manuel Noriega with Peter 
Eisner, The Memoirs of Manuel Noriega, America's Prisoner (New York: 
Random House, 1997), p 107. 

Chapter 28. My Energy Company, Enron, and George W. Bush 

1. For additional information on IPS, its wholly-owned subsidiary Archibald 

Power Corporation, and former CEO John Perkins, see Jack M. Daly and 
Thomas J. Duffy, "Burning Coal's Waste at Archibald," Civil Engineering, 
July 1988; Vinee Coveleskie, "Co-Generation Plant Attributes Cited," The 
Scranton Times, October 17, 1987; Robert Curran, 'Archibald Facility Dedi- 
cated," Scranton Tribune, October 17, 1987; "Archibald Plant Will Turn 
Coal Waste into Power," Citizens Voice, Wilkes-Barre, PA, June 6, 1988; 
"Liabilities to Assets: Culm to Light, Food," editorial, Citizen's Voice, 
Wilkes-Barre, PA, June 1, 1988. 

2. Joe Conason, "The George W. Bush Success Story" Harpers Magazine, Feb- 
ruary 2000; Craig Unger, "Saving the Saudis," Vanity Fair, October 2003, 
pl65. 

3. Craig Unger, "Saving the Saudis," Vanity Fair, October 2003, p 178. 

4. See George Lardner Jr. and Lois Romano, "The Turning Point After Coming 
Up Dry" Washington Post, July 30, 1999; Joe Conason, "The George W. 
Bush Success Story," Harpers Magazine, February 2000; and Sam Parry, 
"The Bush Family Oiligarchy — Part Two: The Third Generation," 
http://www.newnetizen.com/presidential/bushoiligarchy.htm (accessed 
April 19, 2002). 

5. This theory took on new significance and seemed ready to fall under the 

spotlight of public scrutiny when, years later, it became clear that the 
highly respected accounting firm of Arthur Andersen had conspired with 
Enron executives to cheat energy consumers, Enron employees, and the 
American public out of billions of dollars. The impending 2003 Iraq war 
pushed the spotlight away. During the war, Bahrain played a critical role in 
President George W Bush's strategy. 

Chapter 29. I Take a Bribe 

1. Jim Garrison, American Empire: Global Leader or Rogue Power? (San Fran- 
cisco: Berrett-Koehler Publishers, Inc., 2004), p 38. 

Chapter 30. The United States Invades Panama 

1. Manuel Noriega with Peter Eisner, TheMemoirs of Manuel Noriega, Amer- 
ica's Prisoner (New York: Random House, 1997), p 56. 



236 Confessions of an Economic Hit Man 



2. David Harris, Shooting the Moon: The True Story of an American Manhvnt 
Unlike Any Other, Ever (Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 2001), p 31-34. 

3. David Harris, Shooting the Moon: The True Start/ of an American Manhvnt 

Unlike Any Other, Ever (Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 2001), p 43. 

4. Manuel Noriega with Peter Eisner, The Memoirs of Manuel Noriega, Amer- 
ica's Prisoner (New York: Random House, 1997), p 212; see also Craig 
Unger, "Saving the Saudis," Vanity Fair, October 2003, p 165. 

5. Manuel Noriega with Peter Eisner, The Memoirs of Manuel Noriega, Amer- 
icas Prisoner (New York: Random House, 1997), p 114. 

6. See www.famoustexans.com/georgebush.htm, p 2. 

7. Manuel Noriega with Peter Eisner, The Memoirs of Manuel Noriega, Amer- 

ica's Prisoner (New York: Random House, 1997), p 56-57- 

8. David Harris, Shooting the Moon: The True Story of an American Manhunt 

Unlike Any Other, Ever (Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 2001), p 6. 

9. www.famoustexans.com/georgebush.htm, p 3. 

10. David Harris, Shooting the Moon: The True Story of 'an American Manhunt 
Unlike Any Other. Ever (Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 2001), p 4. 

11. Manuel Noriega with Peter Eisner, The Memoirs of Manuel Noriega, Amer- 
ica's Prisoner (New York: Random House, 1997), p 248. 

12. Manuel Noriega with Peter Eisner, The Memoirs of Manuel Noriega, Amer- 
ica's Prisoner (New York: Random House, 1997), p 211. 

13. Manuel Noriega with Peter Eisner, The Memoirs of Manuel Noriega, Amer- 
ica's Prisoner (New York: Random House, 1997), p xxi. 

Chapter 31. An EHM Failure in Iraq 

1. Morris Barrett, "The Web's Wild World," TIME, April 26, 1999, p 62. 

Chapter 32. September 11 and its Aftermath for Me, Personally 

1. For more about the Huaoranis, see Joe Kane, Savages (New York: Alfred A. 
Knopf, 1995). 

Chapter 33. Venezuela: Saved by Saddam 

1. "Venezuela on the Brink," editorial, Nexe York Times, December 18, 2002. 

2. The Revolution Will Not Be Televised, directed by Kim Bartley and 
Donnacha O'Briain (in association with the Irish Film Board, 2003). 
See www.chavezthefihn.com. 

3. "Venezuelan President Forced to Resign," Associated Press, April 12, 2002. 

4. Simon Romero, "Tenuous Truce in Venezuela for the State and its Oil Com- 
pany," JVew York Times, April 24, 2002. 

5. Bob Edwards, "What Went Wrong with the Oil Dream in Venezuela," 
National Public Radio, Morning Edition, July 8, 2003. 

Notes 237 



6. (ringer Thompson, "Venezuela Strikers Keep Pressure on Chavez and Oil 
Exports," New York Times. December 30, 2002. 

7. For more on the jackals and other types of hit men, see: P. W. Singer, Corpo- 

rate Warriors: The Rise of the Privatised Military Industry (Ithaca NY and 
London: Cornell University Press, 2003); James R. Davis, Fortune's War- 
riors: Private Armies and the New World Order (Vancouver and Toronto: 
Douglas & Mclntyre, 2000); Felix I. Rodriguez and John Weisman, 
Shadow Warrior: The CIA Hero oflOO Unknown Battles (New York: Simon 
and Schuster, 1989). 

8. Tim Werner, '"A Coup by Any Other Name," New York Times, April 14, 2002. 

9. "Venezuela Leader Urges 20 Years for Strike Chiefs," Associated Press, Feb- 
ruary 22, 2003. 

10. Paul Richter, "U.S. Had Talks on Chavez Ouster," Los Angeles Times, April 
17, 2002. 

Chapter 34. Ecuador Revisited 

1. Chris Jochnick, "Perilous Prosperity," New Internationalist, June 2001, 

http://www.newint.org/issue335/perilous.htm. 

2. United Nations. Human Development Report (New York: United Nations, 
1999). 

3. For additional information on the hostage situation, see Alan Zibel, "Na- 
tives Seek Redress for Pollution," Oakland Tribune, December 10, 2002; 
Hoy (Quito, Ecuador daily newspaper) articles of December 10-28, 2003; 
"Achuar Free Eight Oil Hostages," El Commercio (Quito daily newspaper), 
December 16, 2002 (also carried by Reuters): "Ecuador: Oil Firm Stops 
Work because Staff Seized, Demands Government Action," and "Sarayacu 
— Indigenous Groups to Discuss Release of Kidnapped Oil Men," El Uni- 
verso (Guayaquil, Ecuador, daily newspaper), http://www.eluniverso.com, 
December 24, 2002; and Juan Forero, "Seeking Balance: Growth vs. Culture 
in the Amazon," New York Times, December 10, 2003. Current, updated 
information about Ecuador's Amazonian people is available at the 
Pachamama Alliance Web site: http://www.pachamama.org. 

Chapter 35, Piercing the Veneer 

1. National debt statistics from the Bureau of the Public Debt, reported at 

www.publicdebt.treas.gov/opd/opdpenny.htm; national income statistics 
from the World Bank at w'ww.worldbank.org/data/databytopic/GNIPC.pdf. 

2. Elizabeth Becker and Richard A. Oppel, "A Nation at War: Reconstruction. 
U.S. Gives Bechtel a Major Contract in Rebuilding Iraq," New York Times, 
April 18, 2003, http://w^^\n>tirnes.com/2003/04/l8/international/ 
worklspeciaVl8REBU.html. 

3. Richard A. Oppel with Diana B. Henriques, "A Nation at War: The Con- 
tractor. Company Has Ties in Washington, and to Iraq," New York Times, 
April 18, 2003, http://www.mtimes.com/2003/04/18/international/ 
worldspecial/lSCONT.html. 



238 Confessions of an Economic Hit Man 



^.1 

I 1 4. littp://inoney.crLn.com/2003/04/17/news/companies/war-bechtel/ 

f index.htm. 

Epilogue 

1. Energy Information Administration, reported in USA Today, March 1, 
2004, p 1. 



Notes 239 



INDEX 



Afghanistan, 96-97, 211 

Agoyan hydroelectric plant, xix 

AIDS medicines, xii 

Allen, Ethan, 147 

Allende, Salvador, 78 

al-Qaeda, 206, 211 

Amazon, xvii-xx. 210 

Ameen, Michael, 166 

Aniin, Idi, % 

Amoco, 166 

antipollution laws, 164 

Arab-Israeli war, 82 

Arbenz, Jacob, 72-73 

Arbusto, 165-166 

Arias, Arnulfo, 59 

Arias family, 179 

Armas, Carlos Castillo, 73 

Ashland Oil Company, 185-186 

Asian Development Bank, 37 

assassinations 

Hugo Spadafora, 174 
Jaime Roldos, ix, 156 
Omar Torrijos, ix, 158-161 

B 

Baer, Robert, 94 
Bahasa Indonesia, 38 
Bahrain, 166 
Baker, James A., Ill, 98 
banking industry 

Asian Development Bank, 37 

Chase Bank, 194 

Inter-American Development 
Bank, 74 

Panama, 63 
Bechtel, Riley P., 214 



Bechtel Group, Inc., 73-74, 160, 164, 

173, 213, 214-215 
bin Laden, Osama, 96-97, 183, 194 
bin Laden family, 97-98 
British Petroleum (later BP), 18 
British Virgin Islands, 147 
Bunau-Varilla, Philippe, 59 
Bush, George H. W., 59, 79, 168 

bin Laden family and, 98 

United Fruit Company, 72-73, 209 

"wimp factor," 175, 184 
Bush, George W., 79, 166 

Arbusto, 165-166 

rallying of support for U.S. 
activities, 198 

Venezuelan activities, 199 
Bush administration (George H. W.), 

173-174 
Bush administration (George W.), 

201, 213-214 
Bush family, 209 



Canal Treaty 59, 102-103, 154-155, 

158-161. See also Panama 
Canal Zone, 61, 64, 65. See also 

Panama 
Carlyle Group, 98 
Carter, Jimmy, 102, 118-119, 154, 

159-160, 168 
Carvajal, Jose, 144-145 
Casey, William J., 174 
Chas. T. Main, Inc. (MAIN). See 

MAIN 
Chase Bank, 194 
Chavez, Hugo, xx, 195, 197-202, 204. 

See also Venezuela 
Cheney, Richard, 79, 177 



240 



Chile, 78, 200 

Chuchu, Sergeant (Jose de Jesus 

Martinez), 159 
Chumpi, Shakaim, 189 
CIA, 73, 156, 161, 200 
Civilization on Trial (Toynbee), 45 
"Claudine," xi, 14, 22, 53-54 
Colombia, 61 

economic/electric load 
forecasting, 122 

historical overview of, 120-122 

La Viohncia, 121 

rule against sending U.S. citizens 
to, 124 
colonial Americans, 218 
colonialism, in Panama, 103 
commerce, imperial approach to, 218 
Common Sense (Paine), 49, 63 
communism, 61, 170 
conspiracies, xii-xiii, 156, 216, 217 
corporal punishment, 82 
corporatocracy, xii-xiii, 26 

actions to stop, 221-225 

basis of, 217 

growth of, 78 

media as part of, 221 

of modern empire, 216 

obstacles to, 212-213 

pillars of, 143 

strengthening of, 83 
corruption, 75, 179 
"Country with Five Frontiers, The" 

(Greene), 104-105 
coups, 73, 200, 201 
culture, Indonesian, 38-39 

D 
Dauber, Jake, 52 
debt 

creation of foreign, 15-16, 17 

Ecuador's, 203 

Iran's payment of, 114-116 

United States, 212 

world, xviii 



Department of State, rule against 
sending U.S. citizens to 
Colombia, 124 

Department of the Treasury, 84 

Depression, New Deal policies, 78 

deregulation, 164-165, 168 

desensitization, 180-181 

destabilization campaigns, U.S., \J6 

developed countries (DCs), 47-48 

"Doc," 113-116 

dollars versus euros, 213 

Dominican Republic, 61 

Dream Change Coalition, 186 

E 
econometric model, 101-102 
economic forecasting, 84-85, 122 
economic hit men (EHMs) 

description of, ix 

effects of work of, 198 

goals/objectives of the job, 15, 17 

identification of potential, 19 

rationalizations of deeds by, 169 

role of, 90 

standards for, 84 

training, 14-15 
economics, 26, 78, 83-84 
Ecuador, xvii-xx, 141-145, I89-190, 
203-210. See also Roldos, 
Jaime 

Ecuadorian Congress, 156 

Huaorani tribe, 186 

Hydrocarbons Policy, 143-144 

national budget/debt, 203 

oil spill, xvii-xviii 

poverty levels, 203 

Shell, xvi, 207 

tribal wars against oil companies, 
xvi-xvii 
Eisner, Peter, 178 
electric load forecasting, 31, 54, 

109, 122 
embassies, 16, 118-119 
empire building, xx-xxi, 176, 216 
energy industry, 164-165, 168-169 
England, 18 



Index 241 



Enron, 165 

euros versus dollars, 213 



Faisal, King, 82 

"Farhad," 5-6, 117-119 

"Fidel," 63 

financing of terrorism, 96-97 

fixed exchange rates, 77 

Flowering Desert project, 110-111 

forecasting 

economic/electric load 

(Colombia), 122 
electric load, 31, 54, 109, 122 
Saudi Arabian economic, 84-85 

foreign aid, 47-48, 75 

foreign policy, U.S., 21, 47 

free market system, 170 

free trade agreements, 221-222 

Fujimori, Alberto K.. 200 

future actions, 221-225 

G 

Gadhafi, Muammar, 60 

Garrison, Jim, 170 

General Agreement on Tariffs and 

Trade (GATT), 78 
Getting to Know the General 

(Greene), 159 
global empire, 170 
globalization, 185 

global management of petroleum, 214 
Grant, Winifred, 162 
Greene, Graham, 104-107, 159 
Greve, Einar, 9, 13, 134 
gross national product (GNP), 

deceptive nature of, 16 
Ground Zero, 190-195. See also 

September 11, 2001 attacks 
Guatemala, 72-73, 200 

H 
Hall, Mac, 52, 145, 165 
Harken Energy, 98, 165-166 
Harris, David, 177 
Hayes, Martha, 134 



Helms, Richard, 79 

holy wars, 49 

hostages, U.S. Embassy (Iran), 

118-119 
Hostler, Charles, 166 
House of Saud. See Saudi Arabia 
Huaorani tribe (Ecuador), 142-143, 

190 
hunger, x, xii, 192 
Hurtado, Osvaldo, 157 
Hussein, Saddam, 182, 200 
hydrocarbons law, 156, 196 
Hydrocarbons Policy, 143-144 
hydroelectric plants, Agoyan, xix 

I 
ideals, 75 
Illingworth, Charlie, 24-25, 28-29. 

104 
imperialism, 48, 139, 218 
importation of labor forces, 86 
income, world population, 65, 206 
Independent Power Systems, Inc. 
(IPS), 163-164, 168, 185-186 
Indonesia, 16 

creation of language for, 38 
culture, 38-39 
Japanese invasion of, 20 
oil industry, 25 
views of Americans, 42-46 
Institute de Recursos Hidraulicos y 

Electrification, 71 
integrity. 138-139 

intelligence community, U.S., 104-105 
Inter-American Development Bank, 

74 
international financial system 

trends, 169-170 
international law, U.S. breach of, 

177-178 
International Monetary Fund (IMF), 

19, 78, 169-170 
international monetary system, 77 
Interoceanic Canal Commission, 

103-104 
invasions, 20, 176-177, 184, 200 



242 Confessions of an Economic Hit Man 



Iran 

Islamic uprising, 117119 
OPEC oil embargo, 76-77 
payment of debts by, 114-116 
rebellion against British 

Petroleum, 18 
Shah of Shahs, 108 
Torrijos's opinions of, 72 

Iraq, 182, 183-184, 199, 200 

Islam, 45-46, 117-119 



Jakarta, 24 

Japanese invasion of Indonesia, 20 
jihads, 49 

Johnson administration, 78-79 
Joint Economic Commission 
(JECOR), 83-84 

K 
Kellogg Brown & Root, 214-21215 
Kennedy administration, 78-79, 121 
Khadafi (or Gadhafi), Muammar, 60 
Khomeini, Ruhollah, Ayatollah, 

118-119 
Kissinger, Henry, 91 
Kuwait, 184 



labor forces, importation to Saudi 

Arabia of, 86 
language, creation of Indonesian, 38 
leaders, discrediting of, 208 
less-developed countries (LDCs), 

47-48 
Lippman, Thomas W,, 91, 96 
loans, conditions of, xvii. 

See also debt 
Longfellow, Henry Wadsworth, 

217-218 

M 

macroeconomics, 26 

MAIN 

beliefs of employees, 55-56 
Colombian contracts, 122 



competitors, 12, 89 
Department of the Treasury and, 

84 
effects of Saudi Arabian deal, 

94-98 
electrical forecasting, 109 
electrification project in Southeast 

Asia, 21 
energy industry, position on, 165 
firing of Bruno Zambotti, 145-146 
folding of, 165 
gender biases, 13 
losses in Iran, 119 
Manifest Destiny, 60-61, 75, 155 
Markov method for econometric 

modeling, 102 
"Martin, Claudine," xi, 14, 22, 53-54 
Martinez, Jose de Jesus (Sergeant 

Chuchu), 159 
"Mary," 147-150 

McNamara, Robert, 26, 55, 78-79, 167 
media, 221 
Memoirs of Manuel Noriega: 

America's Prisoner (Eisner), 178 
military-industrial complex, 79 
military support to Saudi Arabia, 

conditions of, 90 
missionary groups, Summer 

Institute of Linguistics (SIL), 
141-142 
Monroe, James, 61 
Monroe Doctrine, 61 
Montesinos, Vladimiro L., 200 
Mormino, Paul, 54 
Mossadegh, Mohammad, 18, 72, 

91, 114 
Muslims, 45-46, 118-119 

N 
national budget/debt, Ecuador's, 203 
National Security Agency (NSA), 6, 

7-8 
nation-building programs, 121 
natural resources, xviii, 183-184, 

205-206, 207-208 
New Deal policies, 78 



Index 243 



New Hampshire Public Service 

Commission, 163 
New York City, 190-195 
Nicaragua, 200 
Nixon, Richard, 43, 77 
Noriega, Manuel, 160, 173-181, 200 
nuclear power, 154, 163 

O 
October War, 82 

off-shore drilling rights (Bahrain), 166 
oil income, 83 
oil industry 

devastation of rain forests, 205, 

207-208 
George W. Bush and, 165-166 
global management of 

petroleum, 214 
guarantee of oil supplies to U.S. by 

Saudi Arabia, 89-90 
hydrocarbons law, 156, 196 
Indonesia, 25 
off-shore drilling rights 

(Bahrain), 166 
Oil Boom, xviii 
oil concessions, xix-xx 
oil embargos, 76-77, 82-83, 89, 197 
oil spills, xvii-xviii 
OPEC, 76-77, 109, 197, 211-212 
protecting U.S. supplies, 83 
revenues, 197 
rising prices, 200 
U.S. dependence on oil, reduction 

of, 168 
Venezuelan oil, 196-197 
organized crime metaphor, 139-140 
Ouellette, Pauline, 134 



Pahlavi, Mohammad Reza, Shah, 18, 

71-72 
Paine, Thomas, 49 
Panama, 58-60, 61, 200, 211. See 
aim Torrijos, Omar 
banking industry, 63 
canal traffic, 63 



Canal Treaty, 59, 102-103, 

154-155, 158-161 
Canal Zone, 64, 65 
goal of invasion of, 176-177 
income per capita, 65 
Instituto de Recursos Hidraulicos 

y Electrification, 71 
Interoceanic Canal Commission, 

103-104 
prostitution laws, 68 
U.S. invasion of, 173-179, 200 
Panamanian Defense Forces, 174 
Pan-American interests, 121-122 
Parker, Howard, 28-33, 52 
"Paula," 122-123, 124-127, 129-130 
Paul Revere's Ride (Longfellow), 

217-218 
Peace Corp.. 8-10 

Perkins, John. See also Independent 
Power Systems, Inc. (IPS) 
acceptance of bribe, 170-172 
birth of daughter, 162 
early life, 3-4 
education, 4-5 
expert witness/consulting 
practice, 154, 163, 187 
job with NSA, 7-8 
marriage to Ann, 5-6 
marriage to Winifred, 162 
Peace Corp, 8-10 
personal history timeline, 

226-229 
position with MAIN, 10-11 
promotions at MAIN, 101 
recruitment by MAIN, 9 
resignation from MAIN, 150, 

153-154 
resume, 131-140 
self-reflection, 124-130, 147-150, 

179-181 
separation from Ann, 22, 50-51 
Spirit of the Shuar (Perkins and 

Chumpi), 189 
Stress-Free Habit, The, 171 
"Uncle Frank," 6-7 
visit to Ground Zero, 189-195 



244 Confessions of an Economic Hit Man 



The World Is As Yov Dream It, 186 
writing of books, 170, 179, 

187-188, 198, 218 
Petroleos de Venezuela. 196 
petroleum. See oil industry 
pharmaceutical industry, xii 
Pinochet, Augusto, 200 
piracy, 216 
polarization, 197 
pollution, antipollution laws, 164 
poverty levels, xviii, 24, 197, 203 
Prasad, Nadipuram "Ram," 102 
Priddy, Paul, 145-146, 153, 154 
"Prince W.", 92, 93-95 
privatization, 183-184, 185 
"Prophecy of the Condor and Eagle," 

209-210 
prostitution laws (Panama), 68 
Public Service Company of New 

Hampshire, 154 
Public Utility Regulatory Policy Act 

(PURPA), 167 

R 
rain forests, xviii, 205-206, 207-208 
Rasmon ("Rasy"), 38-39, 42 
Reagan, Ronald, 154-155, 168 
Reagan administration, 173-174 
redemption, 224 
Reich, Otto J., 201 
religious laws, Saudi Arabia, 81-82 
Republican Party, 74 
Revere, Paul, 217-218 
Riyadh. See Saudi Arabia 
Rockefeller, David, 194 
Roldos, Jaime, ix, 141-145, 154, 156, 

196. See also Ecuador 
Roosevelt, Kermit, 18-19, 72, 80, 199 
Roosevelt, Theodore, 58-59, 61, 

120-123 



Sadat, Anwar, 82 
Saint, Rachel, 143 
"Sally," 93-95 
Saud, Mohammed ibn, 81 



Saudi Arabia 

dependence on United States, 

87-88 
financing of terrorism, 96-97 
guarantee of oil supplies to U.S. 

by, 89-90 
historical overview of, 81-82 
importation of labor forces, 86 
oil income, 83 
"Prince W.", 92, 93-95 
religious laws, 81-82 
"Saudi Connection, The," 96-97 
"Saving the Saudis," 97-98 
trash removal by goats, 85, 182 
U.S. relations, 83-84, 87-88, 90 
Saudi Arabian Money-laundering 
Affair/Saudi Arabian Monetary 
Agency (SAMA), 88, 92, 96 ; 
182-185, 211, 214 
"Saudi Connection, The," 96-97 
SAVAK, 114 

"Saving the Saudis," 97-98 
School of the Americas, 61-62, 

159-160, 175 
Schultz, George P., 74, 79, 160, 173, 

176, 213 
Seabrook nuclear power plant, 154, 

163 
September 11, 2001 attacks, x, 98, 

190-195, 198 
Shell, Ecuador, xvi, 207 
Shooting the Moon (Harris), 177 
Shuars, 186, 189, 207, 222 
Sir Francis Drake Channel, 147 
slave trader analogy, 180-181 
soldier image, 179-180 
Southeast Asian foreign policy. 

U.S., 21 
Soviet Union, bin Laden/Afghan 

war, .96-97, 183 
Spadafora, Hugo, 174, 175 
Spectrum 7, 165-166 
Spirit of the Shuar (Perkins and 

Chumpi), 189 
statistics, manipulation of, 13 
steps to avoid future crises, 221-225 



Index 245 



Stone & Webster Engineering Corpo- 
ration (SWEC), 170-172, 185 

story leaks, 215 

Stress-Free Habit, The (Perkins), 171 

Suharto, 21 

Sukarno, 20-21, 37-38 

Summer Institute of Linguistics 
(S1L), 141-142, 156, 157, 158 

T 
terrorism 

deaths from, x 

Saudi terrorist financing, 96-97 
September 11, 2001 attacks, 98, 
189-195 
Texaco, xvii 

Torres, Manuel, 124-125 
Torrijos, Omar, ix, 58-60, 61, 66, 
102. See also Panama 
death of, 158-161 
offer of asylum to exiled leaders, 

119 
on President Ford, 103 
on Roldos's death, 157 
torture, "Doc," 113-116 
Toynbee, Arnold, 45, 46 
training centers, warfare, 61-62 
trans-Andean oil pipeline, xvii-xviii 
trash removal by goats, 85, 182 
tribal wars (Ecuador), against oil 

companies, xvi-xvii 
truth, denial of, 119 

U 
United Fruit Company, 72-73, 209 
United States 

breach of international law, 

177-178 
colonial Americans, 218 
commercial interests, 

transformations in, 185 
invasion of Panama, 173-179, 200 
national debt, 212 
old republic versus new empire, 

127-128 
policy on empire building, 176 



pro-Israeli stance, punishment 

for, 82-83 
relations with Saudi Arabia, 

83-84, 87-88, 90 
services sold to Colombia by, 122 
views of Indonesia by Americans, 
42-46 
United States-Saudi Arabian Joint 
Economic Commission 
(JECOR), 83-84 
United Way, 186 
U.S. Department of State, rule 

against sending U.S. citizens to 
Colombia, 124 
U.S. Department of the Treasury, 84 
U.S. Embassy (Iran) seizure, 118-119 
U.S. intelligence community, 104-105 
U.S. Southern Command, 159-160 
USAID, 37 

V 
Venezuela, xx, 61, 196-202. See also 

Chavez, Hugo 
Vietnam War, 21 
Violencia, La (Colombia), 121 

W 

Wahhabi sect, 81-82 

Wall Street, 193 

warfare training centers, 61-62, 

159-160 
wars 

Arab-Israeli, 82 

bin Laden/Afghan war, 96-97, 183 

Ecuador, xvi-xvii, 206 

holy, 49 

October War, 82 

tribal (Ecuador), xvi-xvii 

Vietnam, 21 

World War II, 78 
Washington, George, 194 
Waste Management, Inc., 96 
waste products, 163 
water resources, Iraq's, 183-184 
wealth, private financial, xix 
weapons production, 56-57 



246 Confessions of an Economic Hit Man 



Weinberger, Caspar, 79, 160, 213 Y 

"wimp factor" (George H. W. Bush), "Yamin," 109-112 

175, 184 
World and the West, The (Toynbee), 45 Z 

World Bank 19, 74, 78, 79, 169-170 Zambotti, Bruno, 52, 101, 104, 145, 

World Is As You Dream It, The 163-164. 

(Perkins), 186 Zapata Petroleum Corp., 73, 79 

World Trade Organization (WTO), 

170 
World War II, 78 



Index 247 



ABOUT THE AUTHOR 



John Perkins has lived four lives: as an economic hit man (EHM); as 
the CEO of a successful alternative energy company, who was re- 
warded for not disclosing his EHM past; as an expert on indigenous 
cultures and shamanism, a teacher and writer who used this ex- 
pertise to promote ecology and sustainability while continuing to 
honor his vow of silence about his life as an EHM; and now as a 
writer who, in telling the real-life story about his extraordinary deal- 
ings as an EHM, has exposed the world of international intrigue and 
corruption that is turning the American republic into a global em- 
pire despised by increasing numbers of people around the planet. 

As an EHM, John's job was to convince third world countries to 
accept enormous loans for infrastructure development — loans that 
were much larger than needed — and to guarantee that the develop- 
ment projects were contracted to U.S. corporations like Halliburton 
and Bechtel. Once these countries were saddled with huge debts, the 
U.S. government and the international aid agencies allied with it 
were able to control these economies and to ensure that oil and 
other resources were channeled to serve the interests of building a 
global empire. 

In his EHM capacity, John traveled all over the world and was 
either a direct participant in or a witness to some of the most dra- 
matic events in modern history, including the Saudi Arabian Money- 
laundering Affair, the fall of the shah of Iran, the death of Panama's 
President Omar Torrijos, the subsequent invasion of Panama, and 
events leading up to the 2003 invasion of Iraq. 

In 1980, Perkins founded Independent Power Systems, Inc. (IPS), 
an alternative energy company. Under his leadership as CEO, IPS 
became an extremely successful firm in a high-risk business where 
most of his competitors failed. Many "coincidences" and favors from 
people in powerful positions helped make IPS an industry leader. 
John also served as a highly paid consultant to some of the corpora- 
tions whose pockets he had previously helped to line —taking on this 



248 




role partly in response to a series of not-so-veiled threats and lucra- 
tive payoffs. 

After selling IPS in 1990, John became a champion for indigenous 
rights and environmental movements, working especially closely 
with Amazon tribes to help them preserve their rain forests. He 
wrote five books, published in many languages, about indigenous 
cultures, shamanism, ecology, and sustainability; taught at universities 
and learning centers on four continents; and founded and served on 
the board of directors of several leading nonprofit organizations. 

One of the nonprofit organizations he founded and chaired, 
Dream Change Coalition (later simply Dream Change, or DC), be- 
came a model for inspiring people to attain their personal goals and, 
at the same time, to be more conscious of the impacts their lives have 
on others and on the planet. DC seeks to empower individuals to 
create more balanced and sustainable communities. DCs Pollution 
Offset Lease for Earth (POLE) program offsets the atmospheric pol- 
lution we each create, helps indigenous people preserve their forests, 
and promotes earth-honoring changes in consciousness. DC has de- 
veloped a following around the world and has inspired people in 
many countries to form organizations with similar missions. 



About the Author 249 



During the 1990s and into the new millennium, John honored 
his vow of silence about his EHM life and continued to receive lu- 
crative corporate consulting fees. He assuaged his guilt by applying 
to his nonprofit work much of the money he earned as a consultant. 
Arts & Entertainment television featured him in a special titled 
"Headhunters of the Amazon," narrated by Leonard Nimoy. Italian 
Cosmopolitan ran a major article on his "Shapeshifting" workshops 
in Europe. TIME magazine selected Dream Change as one of the 
thirteen organizations in the world whose Web sites best reflect the 
ideals and goals of Earth Day. 

Then came September 11, 2001. The terrible events of that day 
convinced John to drop the veil of secrecy around his life as an 
EHM, to ignore the threats and bribes, and to write Confessions of 
an Economic Hit Man. He came to believe in his responsibility to 
share his insider knowledge about the role the U.S. government, 
multinational "aid" organizations, and corporations have played in 
bringing the world to a place where such an event could occur. He 
wanted to expose the fact that EHMs are more ubiquitous today than 
ever before. He felt he owed this to his country, to his daughter, to all 
the people around the world who suffer because of the work he and 
his peers have done, and to himself. In this book, he outlines the 
dangerous path his country is taking as it moves away from the 
original ideals of the American republic and toward a quest for 
global empire. 

Previous books by John Perkins include Shapeshifiing, The World 
Is As You Dream It, Psychonavigation, The Stress-Free Habit, and 
Spirit of the Shuar. 

To learn more about John, to find out where he is lecturing, to order 
his books, or to contact him, please go to his Web site: 

www.JohnPerkins.org. 

To discover more about the work of Dream Change, the 501(c)3 
nonprofit that is transforming global consciousness, please visit: 

www.dreamchange.org. 



250 Confessions of an Economic Hit Man 